Using Markov Models and Random Walks to Examine Strategy Use in Differently Skilled Readers

ABSTRACT 
Prompting students to generate constructed responses as they read provides a window into the processes and strategies that they use to make sense of complex text. In this study, Markov models examined the extent to which (1) patterns of strategies and (2) strategy combinations could be used to inform computational models of students’ text comprehension. Random Walk models further revealed how consistency in strategy use over time was related to comprehension performance. High school (n = 257) and college students (n = 153) produced constructed responses at predetermined points while reading a scientific text. Each constructed response was scored for the presence of three common comprehension strategies 
(i.e., paraphrasing, bridging, elaborating), such that each constructed response could then be categorized as one of eight combination types. Markov chains revealed that participants who better understood the text engaged in different behaviors than their less skilled peers, such that they were more likely to use combinations of strategies while reading the text, particularly paraphrasing and bridging. Random Walk analysis demonstrated that students who better understood the text were more consistent in their strategy use. The results suggest that Markov and Random Walk models are useful methods for identifying different learner profiles based on strategy use, as revealed by learners’ constructed responses. 

Keywords 
Reading comprehension, Strategies, Markov models 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Reading is a fundamental life skill, whether one is trying to read a novel, a science textbook in a university course, a technical document for work, or an instruction manual for assembling furniture. However, many students struggle to comprehend texts. For example, 30% of U.S. students perform below basic proficiency in 
 
 
Do not delete, move, or resize this block. If the paper is accepted, this block will need to be filled in with reference information. 
 
reading comprehension [20]. Several factors contribute to successful comprehension. To understand texts, particularly texts with complicated syntax or unfamiliar topics, readers engage in a variety of processes and strategies, including paraphrasing, bridging, and elaborating. When students paraphrase, they put the text in their own words. By contrast, bridging and elaborating require the generation of inferences that contain information that is not explicit in the text. Bridging refers to connecting ideas and information from different parts of the text. Bridging has been shown to be one of the most effective strategies for reading comprehension, particularly if the bridges connect more distant areas of text [15]. Elaborating is expanding on what one has learned from the text with one’s prior knowledge about the topic.  
Using bridging and elaborative inferences strategies has been found to improve comprehension on standardized reading tests [12]. More skilled readers are more likely to engage in more complex comprehension strategies, such as bridging and elaboration, that help them comprehend the text, while less skilled readers are more likely to rely on paraphrasing [7]. One way to encourage students to engage in such strategies is to ask them to self-explain a text as they read. Self-explanation prompts help students think deeper about the text, which facilitates strategy use and improves comprehension [21]. 
The strategies participants use while reading are typically examined via constructed response protocols (CRs). In CRs, students report their processes during a learning task. One method of obtaining CRs is asking participants to self-explain a text at specific points, and to type out these explanations. Prior work has shown that expert raters can reliably identify different comprehension strategies within CRs [14] and recent advances in natural language processing 
(NLP) have allowed researchers to develop and refine algorithms that can match these human judgments [4, 13]. Thus, mining readers’ CRs can serve as a powerful tool to generate high quality learner models based on students’ differing strategy use. The current study uses hand-coded CRs to examine participants’ dynamic strategy use. 
Several intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs) have been developed to enhance students’ use of effective reading strategies. For example, iSTART [17] provides students with self-explanation reading training using a combination of instruction and practice via lesson videos, mini-games and reading practice. Training students on effective self-explanation reading strategies has been demonstrated to improve students’ text comprehension [16]. ITSs such as iSTART rely on the automated identification of different reading strategies in CRs to drive feedback to students on their self-explanations or other reading behaviors. The feedback may re-direct students to lessons on strategy use or provide recommendations of other strategies to try using. In order to better train students to modify their strategy use in ways that enhance reading comprehension, it is beneficial to understand the different ways students use strategies to engage with texts. 
Past research more commonly examines paraphrasing, bridging, and elaboration strategies as separate variables or outcomes and measures strategy use in terms of their overall frequency of use [13, 19]. However, some types of strategy combinations may be more effective in promoting reading comprehension than using any one strategy in isolation. One possibility is that paraphrasing, by creating a more complete understanding of the most recently read text, facilitates the use of further strategies such as bridging and elaboration. The current study therefore examines combinations of strategy use within CRs, rather than overall frequencies of paraphrasing, bridging, and elaborating. Additionally, traditional analyses of CRs rely on an overall proportion or score across an entire text. This approach ignores the moment-to-moment changes in processing that occur as properties of texts change across sentences and paragraphs [18]. 
1.1 Our Approach 
The current study aims to use two approaches that are more common in other areas to examine dynamic patterns in strategy use: Markov Chains and Random Walk analyses. These analyses are intended to reveal systematic differences in the ways that more and less successful comprehenders engage with texts. That is, the combinations and patterns of strategy use in students’ CRs will vary in relation to their performance on a text comprehension assessment. More specifically, we predict that more successful comprehenders will be marked by more frequent use of effective comprehension strategies, such as bridging and elaboration, and in particular, the use of combinations of strategies, such as para-bridging (i.e., combining paraphrasing and bridging within one CR). This prediction naturally stems from skilled readers knowing how to use more strategies and use them in various contexts. They will also show a tendency towards certain types of switches, rather than randomly switching between strategies. Less successful comprehenders will be more likely to use strategies in isolation, especially paraphrasing, and will show less consistency in their strategy use patterns. 
Markov chains are used to simulate processes with patterns that can be imprecisely predicted through probabilities [10]. In such processes, the probability of a given outcome depends on the previous outcome. For this study, the outcomes are different types of strategies, and the probability of using a strategy in a self-explanation depends on the strategy that was used in the previous self-explanation. The probabilities are determined based upon previously collected data and then displayed in a Markov chain visualization. Markov chains have been used in studies of mastery of ending letter sounds [11], and student knowledge and learning have been modeled using hidden Markov models in Bayesian Knowledge Tracing [6, 22, 24]. By contrast, Markov chains have not been widely explored as a method of studying comprehension processes in CRs. Cohesive features that help text comprehension, such as cues about causality, time, and space, are not always uniformly distributed within text; readers need to be sensitive to these features and adjust their strategy use accordingly to successfully comprehend a text [18]. Skilled readers are likely to be strategic in their uses of comprehension processes, meaning they match their strategy use to the text [8]. Their strategy use is likely to be more structured, with consistent patterns in the types of switches that occur between strategies. Using Markov chains provides a learning analytic technique with strong potential to reveal students’ flexibility in comprehension strategy use, as well as how those dynamic processes differ as a function of reading skill. 
To show the consistency of pattern use over time for individual participants, the current study uses random walk models, which are a type of sequential pattern analysis tool. They provide a spatial representation of an individual’s path taken over time [2]. Such representations have commonly been used in the field of ecology, such as modeling animal migration patterns [3]. The movements of red deer are modeled on a graph with an x- and y-axis; every movement of the deer is plotted as a movement on the graph. Random walks have been used for a variety of other purposes, including decision making [9] and numerical cognition [5]. Using CRs allows us to code participants’ strategy use and in turn, random walk models afford examining the consistency of students’ strategy use over time.  
Participants’ random walks all start at (0, 0) on a graph. Four types of strategy use are defined as four different directions on the graph. Each CR counts as one step of the walk and moves one unit in a direction, based on the strategy used. The end point of each student’s walk is plotted on a graph. Participants with more consistent strategy use have end points farther from the origin, while participants who frequently switch their strategy use have end points closer to the origin. Students who have more structured strategy use are likely to have some consistencies in the types of strategies they use, such as relying on paraphrasing and bridging. Inconsistent strategy use could indicate participants are not creating thoughtful explanations or using strategic choices for text comprehension. Their random walks may display multiple switches in strategy use and/or reliance on ineffective strategies. Random walk models offer additional information compared to Markov chains by showing the consistency of strategy use for individual participants, rather than the aggregated switching tendencies displayed by a Markov chain. Additionally, the random walk model is designed to show each participants’ overall consistency over time, while Markov chains show probabilities of switching for each individual strategy. 
The current study uses two extant datasets to help determine the generalizability of the research findings. Dataset 1 included 2322 CRs from 257 high school students (158 female; mean 
age = 17.58). Dataset 2 included 2480 CRs generated by 153 undergraduates. We predict that the results will be similar across datasets, but that the older, likely more skilled readers, in Dataset 2 will show more frequent use of effective strategies, more frequent use of combinations of strategies, and greater consistency of strategy use, compared to participants in Dataset 1. 
2. METHOD 
2.1 Datasets 
In Dataset 1, participants read one of two texts, “Heart Disease” or 
“Red Blood Cells”. Participants were asked to provide self-explanations at nine points in their assigned text. Both texts contain about 
300 words and use scientific terminology suitable for the age of the participants. They have been validated in prior studies and matched for linguistic difficulty. In Dataset 2, participants read a text called “Cell Division”, containing about 600 words, and were asked to self-explain the text at 16 different points. In both datasets, participants completed comprehension questions about the text after reading. The overall score on the questions is used as an outcome measure of students’ text comprehension. 
2.2 Expert Rating of Strategy Use 
Verbal protocols were scored by expert raters using a self-explanation rubric that assesses the presence or absence of three reading strategies: paraphrase, bridging, and elaboration. Paraphrase presence was scored based on the inclusion of idea units from the most recently read sentence. Bridging presence was scored based on the inclusion of references to other parts of the text.  Elaboration presence was scored based on the inclusion of words or ideas that elaborate on the text but were not directly present in the text. Since paraphrase, bridging, and elaboration were scored independent of one another, the presence of any one strategy could be observed on its own or in combination with any of the other two strategies. Then, responses were categorized as containing one of eight strategy combination types, based on the presence of individual strategies: “None”, “Paraphrase” (paraphrasing in isolation), “Bridge” (bridging in isolation), “Elaboration” (elaborating in isolation), “Para-bridge” (paraphrasing and bridging in combination), 
“Para-elab” (paraphrasing and elaborating in combination), “Bridge-elab” (bridging and elaborating in combination), and “All” (paraphrasing, bridging, and elaborating in combination). These categories did not include the order in which strategies were used within a single response, as the strategies were sometimes intermixed within a single response. For example, a “para-bridge” response means that paraphrasing and bridging were both used, but not in any particular order. 
Scoring training was deemed complete when raters reached sufficient reliability for each coding category (weighted kappa ≥ 0.71). CRs were divided between pairs of raters such that each scored 60% of participant protocols, with 20% of participant protocols being scored by both raters. To calculate inter-rater reliability, protocols scored by both expert raters were compared per dataset, per text, and per coding category on a regular basis up to the latest point where both raters had scored the same protocols. Expert raters discussed coding disagreements to reach a consensus on the score. Following discussions, each rater independently reviewed and rescored as needed their entire set of protocols.  Once raters completed scoring for a given text, scores were finalized only after raters achieved 0.71 or above weighted kappa per coding category. 
2.3 Data Analysis 
In Dataset 1, participants were divided into two groups based on the median performance (50%, std = .22) in the text comprehension test (n=117 for low comprehension, n=118 for high comprehension). In Dataset 2 (median = 50%), the high comprehension group included participants who scored at or above the median such that groups had comparable sample sizes (n=82 for low comprehension, n=71 for high comprehension). The code used to create the Markov chains and the Random Walk displays can be found at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Markov-Chains-615F. 
Markov chains were used to examine the dynamic nature of students’ strategy use, as well as the overall frequency of different strategies. For each chain, we calculated the frequency of each type of strategy switch from one CR to the next. For instance, if a participant used paraphrasing in one CR and used para-bridging in the following submission, we added “1” to the overall frequency of switching from paraphrasing to para-bridging. The frequency of switches from a strategy were divided by the total number of switches from that strategy overall to calculate the probability of switching from one strategy to the next. We also calculated the number of times each strategy was used overall.  
These calculations were visibly represented in Markov chain diagrams created using ‘Matplotlib’ in Python (see Figures 2 and 3). Nodes were created to represent each strategy that was used more than five times. The area of the node was scaled relative to the overall number of times that strategy was used. The probability of switching from one strategy to another was represented by arrows between nodes. Wider arrows indicate a higher probability of switching from the origin node to the end node.1 
To examine consistency of strategy use over time, the current study uses random walk visualizations. As there are several possible “strategy moves” that a reader can make, we opted to simplify the analysis to four choices for visibility. Strategy use per trial was defined as using no strategies, paraphrasing in isolation, bridging in isolation, or two or more strategies in combination. The two or more strategies grouping includes para-bridging, para-elaborating, and para-bridge-elaborating. Each of these strategy combinations are an example of supplementing paraphrasing with one or more strategies, so we chose to combine them into a single group. For every participants’ Random Walk analysis, each CR is coded as one “strategy move”, and each strategy move is associated with a one unit movement in a specified direction. “No strategies” means one step down on the y-axis, “paraphrasing” means one step left on the x-axis, “bridging” means one step right on the x-axis, and “two or more strategies” means on step up on the y-axis. A single participants’ full random walk is shown in Figure 1. The visualization shows that the participant primarily used paraphrasing or two or more strategies as their walk remains in the upper left quadrant. The student sometimes switched between different strategy types as shown by the relative distance away from the origin. In Figures 4 and 5, just the endpoints of each participant’s walk were plotted onto a graph with an origin of (0, 0). For each random walk visualization, the participants’ endpoint of the walk was graphed as a dot with 30% visibility, so that endpoints with more participants are darker. The graphs were created in Python using Matplotlib. 

3. RESULTS 
3.1 Markov Chains 
Elaboration in isolation and the combination of bridging and elaboration were not included as nodes in the Markov chains because participants used those strategies fewer than five times for each chain. The six strategies that are represented in the Markov chains are no recorded strategies (labeled “None” or "N"), paraphrasing (“Para”), bridging (“Bridge” or “B”), paraphrasing and bridging in combination (“Para-Bridge”), paraphrasing and elaborating in combination (“Para-Elab” or “P-E”), and paraphrasing, bridging, and elaborating in combination (“All”). 

The variation in strategy use comparing more and less successful high school readers (Dataset 1) is shown in Figure 2. The low-comprehension group had high probabilities (>40%) for the following transitions: paraphrase to paraphrase (57%), bridge to paraphrase (48%), para-bridge to paraphrase (42%), para-bridge to para-bridge (49%), and all to para-bridge (52%). The high-comprehension group had high probabilities for none to para-bridge (57%), paraphrase to para-bridge (55%), para-bridge to para-bridge (62%), para-elab to para-bridge (48%), and all to para-bridge (47%). The low comprehension group tended to paraphrase (n=503 instances) more than para-bridge (n=420). Paraphrasing was the only strategy students were more likely to continue using than to switch from. Participants were also more likely to use none of the analyzed strategies (n=67) than all three (n=22). Meanwhile, the high comprehension group used more para-bridging (n=607) than paraphrasing (n=322), as shown in Figure 2. Parabridging was the only strategy students were more likely to continue using than to switch from. Students in the high comprehension group were more likely to use a combination of all three strategies (n=65) than no strategies (n=10). They were also more likely to switch to using para-bridging than the low comprehension group, even when their previous response used no strategies. Participants in the high comprehension group were more likely to use para-elaboration as a strategy than the low comprehension group (n=19, n=52). These results suggest paraphrasing is used by most readers. However, readers who are more successful at comprehending texts supplement paraphrasing with other strategies, particularly through para-bridging but also through para-elaborating and para-bridge-elaborating. 
As predicted, the college students in Dataset 2 showed similar trends, as shown in Figure 3. The low-comprehension group had high probabilities (>40%) for the following transitions: paraphrase to paraphrase (52%), para-bridge to para-bridge (63%), para-elab to para-bridge (50%), and all to para-bridge (55%). Participants in the low comprehension group were more likely to use none of the analyzed strategies (n=104) than all three (n=33). Less successful comprehenders used paraphrasing and bridging in isolation more frequently than more successful comprehenders. In the high comprehension group, more distinct trends emerge. Most of the high probability switch types involve para-bridging: the most common switches were none to paraphrase (50%), paraphrase to paraphrase (46%), paraphrase to para-bridge (47%), bridge to para-bridge (62%), para-bridge to para-bridge (74%), para-elab to para-bridge (60%), and all to para-bridge (73%).  Participants in the high comprehension group, compared to the low comprehension group, used more para-bridging (n=732, n=647) and were more likely to continue para-bridging from the previous CR (74% vs 63%). They were more likely to use a combination of all three strategies (n=63) than no strategies (n=30). More successful comprehenders seem to rely on the combination of paraphrasing and bridging. This suggests that the combination of paraphrasing and bridging is generally the most effective aid to comprehension, compared to other examined strategy combinations. 
The two datasets have some differences from each other, likely due to the differences in age and education between the two groups. In Dataset 2, both groups were more likely to para-bridge than to paraphrase, while in Dataset 1, the low comprehension group was less likely to use para-bridging than paraphrasing. In both datasets, participants tended to continue to use the same strategy rather than switching. Additionally, participants tended to not switch between using no strategies or paraphrasing and using all strategies. Participants were much more likely to switch from using a single strategy to two strategies or vice versa. Participants with high comprehension were more likely to be switching between using one to three strategies, while participants with low comprehension were more likely to switch from using between zero to two strategies. As parabridging seems to be the more useful strategy in text comprehension, students in Dataset 2 may be more skilled, which can be expected given that they are university students, rather than high school students. The differences in strategy use between datasets may also be due to differences in the difficulty of the text used, as participants in Dataset 2 read a more complicated text, requiring strategic processing. 
One potential argument against examining participants’ probabilities of switching between strategies is that switching is solely dependent on overall strategy use. For instance, one might argue that participants frequently switch to para-bridging because that strategy is used commonly in general. A series of chi-square analyses were conducted to determine if switching is random (solely dependent on frequency of strategy use), or if there are meaningful trends in switching. Chi-squares were conducted for each switch type grouping (all switches from none, all switches from paraphrasing, etc.). Only switches with an expected value of 5 or more were calculated. In Dataset 1, for the low comprehension group 4 out of 
6 chi-squares were significant (ps < .05); for the high comprehension group 3 out of 4 were significant. In Dataset 2, 5 out of 5 chisquares in the low comprehension group and 4 out of 5 chi-squares in the high comprehension group were significant. 
3.2 Random Walk 
In Dataset 1, each participant had nine steps, leading to a maximum distance of 9 if the same strategy were repeatedly used. Participants in the low comprehension group showed less consistency in their strategy use (Figure 4a) than participants in the high comprehension group (Figure 4b). Low comprehension participants were more likely to use no recorded strategies than the high comprehenders, and they were also more likely to switch between different types of strategies, as shown by having more participants finish closer towards the origin. It appears that participants who were less successful on the comprehension test were more likely to have switched between paraphrasing and bridging, while those who were more successful consistently used paraphrasing or multiple strategies. 
In Dataset 2, each participant had 16 steps. Participants in the low comprehension group (Figure 5a; average entropy score = 2.50) showed less consistency in their strategy use, compared to the high comprehension group (Figure 5b; average entropy score = 2.64). Low comprehension group participants were more likely to use no strategies and bridging compared to participants in the high In Dataset 2, each participant had 16 steps. Participants in the low comprehension group (Figure 5a; average entropy score = 2.50) showed less consistency in their strategy use, compared to the high comprehension group (Figure 5b; average entropy score = 2.64). Low comprehension group participants were more likely to use no strategies and bridging compared to participants in the high comprehension group. Both groups showed a tendency towards using paraphrasing and using two or more strategies in combination. Dataset 2 has considerably more variability than Dataset 1. This may be due to the higher number of response opportunities compared to Dataset 1 (16 vs 9). Participants in Dataset 2 may have needed to use a greater variety of strategies to understand the more difficult text, or they may have experienced more fatigue towards the end of the task. 
4. DISCUSSION 
Discourse comprehension researchers commonly examine overall frequencies of different types of strategies, rather than the dynamics of strategy use. The current study applied Markov chains, a methodology previously used in EDM, and Random Walk analysis, a methodology used in other domains, to better understand the dynamics of strategy use in reading comprehension. Through these analytic techniques, we discovered differences among readers who performed less or more successfully on a reading comprehension task. For instance, relying primarily on para-bridging, along with the occasional use of paraphrasing in isolation or elaboration in combination with other strategies, seems to be characteristic of skilled readers. Relying more on single strategy use, particularly paraphrasing but also bridging in isolation, seems to be characteristic of less-skilled readers. Markov chains could potentially be used to investigate the use of other strategies in reading, such as prediction and comprehension monitoring, to build a fuller understanding of the types of strategies differently skilled readers use. Markov chains are also particularly effective at showing how many switches and which types of switches occur between strategies. Skilled readers are more likely to use multiple strategies, relying on switching between para-bridging and other strategies. Less skilled readers are more likely than skilled readers to use strategies in isolation, such as paraphrasing and bridging, and they appear less structured in the types of switches they use. Random walk analysis illustrated that less skilled readers are less consistent in their strategy use. They switch between paraphrasing and bridging, and at times use no strategies at all. On the other hand, skilled readers tend to rely on using paraphrasing and combinations of strategies that include paraphrasing, and they rarely switch to using solely bridging or no strategies. Understanding the dynamics of strategy use has been elusive [8], and so these types of analytic tools provide new insights about strategy use and how it differs across readers. These analyses show that solely examining the types of strategies used neglects the other ways strategy use differs among readers. 
Our results suggest that examining combinations of strategies may be useful for gaining a more complete picture of students’ strategy use. Markov chains and Random Walk models show that readers who are comprehending texts successfully use multiple strategies while reading. They are frequently using multiple strategies within a single CR of a small section of text. Prior studies have shown that skilled readers are more likely to bridge than less-skilled readers. Examining combinations of strategies demonstrates that skilled readers are not foregoing paraphrasing for better comprehension; they continue to ground their understanding of the text in paraphrasing, and frequently use other strategies to further that comprehension. Because bridging is connecting information from different parts of the text, it contributes to a more cohesive understanding of the text. However, it is difficult to connect different parts of text without a solid understanding of each of the individual parts. When the syntax, vocabulary, or concepts in a sentence are difficult, it may be challenging to build a mental representation of the sentence without paraphrasing it. This mental representation must be constructed prior to higher-order strategies such as bridging and elaborating. The results suggest that models of student strategy use should include the combinations of strategies students use, not just the individual types of strategies. 
One limitation of the work is that analyses were conducted using a median split, which may mask within-group differences. Future research should use a variety of methods to examine strategy use, including regression analyses, to provide a better picture of how strategy use differs as a function of students’ reading comprehension. Furthermore, this study did not consider a variety of factors that affect reading comprehension besides strategy use, such as prior knowledge [23] and motivation [1]. While this study examined two different datasets to improve generalizability, future work should consider using Markov models and Random Walk analysis with other populations, such as second language learners and struggling readers. 
The current study relies on human judgements of strategy use, which are formed through retroactive analysis of data. Researchers are in the process of refining NLP-driven algorithms that can detect these strategies during reading. The current work suggests the possibility of combining these detectors with Markov models and Random Walk analysis as a means of providing real-time stealth assessment of student learning and just-in-time support. These analyses can be used to create different profiles of learners and determine the types of strategy use that are most helpful to comprehension. These profiles could include the types of strategies used and the number of times users switch between different strategies. Once these profiles are established, real-time analysis of students’ strategy use within their typed responses in an automated system could be used to help improve their comprehension of texts. That is, if a student is demonstrating ineffective strategy patterns, an adaptive learning environment (or an instructor using a teacher interface) could intervene and encourage revising the self-explanation or scaffolding to help the student to use more effective strategies. Combining these data mining approaches with adaptive feedback would allow teachers to provide high-quality, real-time individualized instruction that can help a greater number and variety of students to become successful readers. 
