Materials matter: An exploration of text complexity and its effects on middle school readers’ comprehension processing.

Abstract
Purpose: Complex features of science texts present idiosyncratic challenges for middle grade readers, especially in a post-Common Core educational world where students’ learning is dependent on understanding informational text. The primary aim of this study was to explore how middle school readers process science texts and whether such comprehension processes differed due to features of complexity in two science texts. 
Method: Thirty seventh grade students read two science texts with different profiles of text complexity in a think-aloud task. Think-aloud protocols were coded for six comprehension processes: connecting inferences, elaborative inferences, evaluative comments, metacognitive comments, and associations (Authors, 2014). We analyzed the quantity and type of comprehension processes generated across both texts in order to explore how features of text complexity contributed to the comprehension processes students produced while reading. 
Results: Students made significantly more elaborative and connecting inferences when reading a text with deep cohesion, simple syntax, and concrete words, while students made more evaluative comments, paraphrases, and metacognitive comments when reading a text with referential cohesion, complex syntax, and abstract words. 
Conclusions: The current study provides exploratory evidence for features of text complexity affecting the type of comprehension processes middle school readers generate while reading science texts. Accordingly, science classroom texts and materials can be evaluated for word, sentence, and passage features of text complexity in order to encourage deep level comprehension of middle school readers. 

Keywords: middle school, reading comprehension processing, text complexity 

A primary goal of academic reading for middle school students is to master academic content. Notably, as students' progress into reading for understanding, the texts that they read become increasingly complex, both in terms of the content they are reading about and the ways in which this information is conveyed. Middle school readers are at risk for diminishing reading performance due to lagging comprehension skills rather than decoding deficits (American College Testing Inc., 2006; Salinas, 2016). Thus, understanding how students process texts is an important part of both reading in general and supporting the learning of content in other domains.

Of interest in this study is the role of text complexity in how students process science texts. Text complexity, simply put, refers to how difficult a text is to understand. In many cases, educators tend to rely on scant measures of complexity (e.g., metrics of grade level readability) that do not always accurately reflect the deeper comprehension challenges present in a text (Begeny & Greene, 2014). By contrast, we examine text complexity as a multidimensional construct that can vary at the lexical (word), syntax (sentence), and discourse (passage) level. These different aspects of text complexity differentially impact how students process text. Specifically, in the current study, we explore how these different features of text complexity influence how middle school students process different texts.

To examine the effect of text complexity on comprehension processes, we employ a think-aloud method, also known as verbal protocol analysis (Chi, 1997; Ericsson & Simon, 1993). Researchers use this approach as a research tool to examine students' in situ reading processes, although asking students to think-aloud can sometimes be used as an instructional strategy (see Duke & Pearson, 2009). As described in more detail below, think-alouds used in this way are a powerful tool through which researchers can examine the moment-to-moment processes that occur during reading and how these processes vary across task, text, and reader.

To ground this study in the extant research, we first describe why informational science texts are important for middle school readers and why they are particularly challenging. We then draw upon theories of text and discourse comprehension to describe how readers process text and how aspects of text complexity might influence these processes.

Background
The Challenges of Science Text Comprehension
In later elementary school, the purpose of texts in the classroom shift from learning to read to reading to learn (Chall, 1996). At the same time, the texts used in the classroom shift from simple story-based narratives to informational texts. Common Core State Standards and other similar standards have placed greater emphasis on science text comprehension and learning from these texts (NGSS Lead States, 2013). Because of this emphasis, mastering the ability to understand informational science texts is paramount for proficiency, especially in the middle grades.

This focus on learning from informational science texts can be problematic because these informational texts and science text, in particular, can pose unique challenges for developing readers (Goldman, 2012). Informational texts include language structures and content that differ from colloquial language found in narrative texts (Fang, 2006) and other forms of written discourse (Alexander & Jetton, 2000; Chall & Jacobs, 1983; Lee & Spratley, 2010; Snyder & Caccamise, 2010). Specifically, informational science texts can employ technical language using unfamiliar vocabulary (e.g., “allele” or “taxonomy”) and syntax rarely used in general conversation (e.g., embedded clauses) and often unseen in other types of informational texts (Fang, 2012). Additionally, the technical and abstract language of informational science texts differs from symbolic representations inherent to mathematics texts or source-based reasoning embedded in history texts (Fang, 2012). Another challenging aspect of informational texts and science texts, in particular, is that they are often written in ways that do not clearly connect ideas and relationships across a text. This lack of cohesion across the text makes it harder for students to develop a deep understanding of what they read (Best et al., 2005).

Comprehension Processes
Learning from text relies upon the coordination of both lower level reading and higher order comprehension processes. Theories of text comprehension (see McNamara & Magliano, 2009) assume that, as people read, they construct a mental model of the text that includes the information explicit in the text as well as inferences that help them to connect information from across the text and integrate information from prior knowledge. Thus, generating inferences is considered a central process for developing a rich understanding of a text (Barth & Elleman, 2017; Cain & Oakhill, 1999; Kintsch, 1988).

A common way that researchers investigate readers' comprehension processes is through think-aloud protocols (Ericsson & Simon, 1993; Pressley & Afflerbach, 1995). In a think-aloud, a reader is asked to read a text aloud and talk out loud about whatever comes to mind as they read. Think-aloud tasks differ from more traditional reading comprehension assessments because of the quality of responses researchers obtain (Carlson et al., 2014). That is, think-aloud findings offer insight into readers' verbal responses while reading, thus gathering data on comprehension processes in the moment, rather than delayed comprehension products derived after reading has ended (i.e., multiple-choice questions, free recall).

Research has demonstrated that think alouds are a valid and powerful method for assessing moment-to-moment processing of text, although asking readers to think aloud does, in some ways, influence the processes that occur during reading (e.g., Coté & Goldman, 1999; Ericsson & Simon, 1993; Magliano et al., 2007, 2011; McNamara & Magliano, 2009; Wolfe & Goldman, 2005). Processes revealed in thinking aloud have been shown to relate to and predict readers' individual differences (e.g., prior knowledge, reading skill) and postreading comprehension outcomes (McMaster et al., 2012; Rapp et al., 2007). The processes revealed in think-alouds are sensitive to differences within and across text and are correlated with standardized and researcher-created measures of comprehension (Magliano & Millis, 2003; Magliano et al., 2011).

This body of research has identified a number of key comprehension processes that occur during reading and that relate to comprehension outcomes. These processes include elaborative inferences (using background knowledge to explain text), connecting inferences (using information previously stated in the text to explain current text), paraphrases (restating the text in own words), associations (connecting the text with personal experiences), evaluations (evaluating the structure or function of the text), and metacognitive comments (comments about what the reader knows or understands about the text). These processes support mental model construction—these processes help students to connect information from sentence to sentence, integrate information from the text with information in their existing knowledge base (e.g., prior knowledge), and to monitor their own understanding. Consistent with the extant theory, think-aloud studies have highlighted the importance of inferencing in the comprehension process. In general, skilled readers tend to engage in more inference-based processes (elaborative, connecting) that help them to construct a more elaborated mental model, whereas less-skilled readers tend to rely on close-to-text processes (paraphrasing; e.g., Carlson et al., 2014; Coté et al., 1998; McMaster et al., 2012). This is not to say that paraphrasing is a wholly ineffective strategy. Paraphrasing is an important skill for younger readers and can serve as an entryway into more active inferential processes (e.g., Coté et al., 1998; McNamara, 2004). Indeed, skilled readers tend to be more strategic and flexible in the types of processes and strategies as they read (e.g., Goldman, 2012; Seipel et al., 2017). The greater issue is that readers who tend to repeat text or merely paraphrase do not engage in the higher order inferential strategies (elaborating, connecting) that support good mental model construction and deep understanding.

Of particular interest for the current study is the use of think-alouds with younger readers (e.g., Carlson et al., 2014; Coté et al., 1998; Gillam et al., 2009; McMaster et al., 2012). Thinking aloud can help to reveal reader differences that may be less evident in postreading comprehension tests or written products and can help to identify comprehension struggles that can then be remediated through instruction and training. Thus, thinking aloud can serve as both a diagnostic tool for individual readers and texts, but also a lens through which we can better understand comprehension processes more generally.

The Role of Text Complexity in Comprehension
In addition to aspects of the reader (e.g., low- and high-level reading skills, prior knowledge), comprehension processes can vary as a function of features of the text. For example, readers' comprehension processes vary reliably across different genres of text (i.e., expository vs. narrative; Seipel et al., 2017; Wolfe & Goldman, 2005). Notably, there are also more subtle differences across texts that can influence how the text is read. Theories of discourse comprehension would assume these features influence comprehension, and empirical work suggests that these word-, sentence-, and passage-level features of text complexity do have consequences for how texts are processed and understood (e.g., Best et al., 2005; Frantz et al., 2015; Sadoski et al., 2000). However, these differences—and their influence on how successful a student might be in comprehending a particular text—often go unnoticed in practice.

In this study, we are interested in exploring how different features of text complexity affect how students process informational science texts. As mentioned previously, science texts can be challenging for readers because of complex and unfamiliar words (e.g., lexical features), uncommon sentence structures (e.g., syntax), and lack of cohesion across the text (e.g., document- or discourse-level features). Thus, it is important to understand the independent and combined effects of these different challenges and how they influence the processes that students engage in during reading.

The ability to evaluate text complexity across different levels of a text has been made easier by an emerging body of linguistic analysis tools (e.g., Coh-Metrix; Graesser et al., 2004). These tools rely on recent developments in natural language processing and make it possible to quickly evaluate multiple features of language related to comprehension difficulties. In short, our aim in the present work is to examine how multiple features of text complexity influence how middle school readers process informational science texts. Thus, in addition to frequently used measures of complexity (i.e., readability), we will also examine word, syntax, and discourse level variations across text.

Readability
Readability metrics are often considered synonymous with text complexity (Crossley et al., 2019). Familiar tools such as Flesh–Kincaid (Flesch, 1951) or Lexile scores (Stenner et al., 2006) rely on the number of words per sentence and the number of syllables per word to determine how challenging a text is to understand. These metrics serve as an easy-to-use measure of how difficult a text is to read, but they are quite poor at measuring how difficult a text is to understand. Informational science texts often use multiple-meaning words with short syllabic structure that have meanings specific to the scientific domain and an altogether different meaning in colloquial language (Fang, 2006). For example, the following sentence: “Plants lack a nervous system” is relatively short, employs decodable words, and is constructed with few syllables. The word “nervous,” however, has two meanings (the emotional state of being anxious and the nervous system in the body), and deciphering between two definitions may confuse readers or hinder comprehension if such knowledge has yet to be gained. Thus, even though the above example has relatively high readability, there are aspects of complexity that make understanding this sentence more challenging.

Word Concreteness
An important lexical feature of language is word concreteness. Word concreteness refers to the extent to which a word lacks ambiguity. Concrete words evoke tangible associations because they refer to objects or actions that one can easily recall from prior experience. Abstract words, in comparison, are harder to picture and do not elicit a tangible association. Concrete words, like “jump” or “banana,” are more familiar and are often acquired earlier in spoken language, while abstract words, like “liberty” or “photosynthesis,” are less frequently used in everyday conversation. Word concreteness is highly correlated with word familiarity or word frequency, and texts with more concrete words are easier to comprehend (Sadoski et al., 2000). Readers' unfamiliarity with abstract words can create difficulty with comprehension because vocabulary and prior knowledge are well-established predictors of reading comprehension performance (McNamara et al., 1996; Perfetti, 2007; Snow, 2002). Thus, informational science texts can pose a challenge for readers at the lexical level because they contain a number of more abstract and less commonly used terms.

Syntactic Complexity
Syntactic complexity is the degree to which sentences in a text use simple and more familiar syntactic structures to communicate meaning (McNamara et al., 2014). Texts that are more syntactically complex are more difficult to read and understand (Frantz et al., 2015), and yet, the role of syntax in text complexity and comprehension is often overlooked (Scott, 2009).

Take for example these seventh-grade standards from the Next Generation Science Standards, which exemplify the range of syntactic complexity middle school readers encounter: “Genetic information is encoded in DNA molecules.” This example includes one active phrase and relatively simple syntax. By comparison, the following sentence is more syntactically complex: “Every body cell of an individual organism (with a few exceptions) contains an identical set of DNA molecules; and therefore, contains identical genetic information.” The sentence contains an embedded and subordinate clause, making this text more syntactically complex and more challenging to understand.

The following features of complex syntax frequently characterize informational science texts: use of passive voice (i.e., “radium was discovered by scientists, Marie and Pierre Curie”); subordinate clauses (i.e., “crops rotate so that nutrients can return to the soil”); and long, abstract noun phrases (i.e., “the chrysalis, the hard shell encasing a butterfly within the pupa stage, is important within the insect's life cycle”; Fang, 2006). These types of phrases are more taxing on memory and, thus, make a text more challenging. Given their frequency of use in science texts, it is important to better understand how syntactic complexity might influence students' processing of informational science text.

Text Cohesion
In addition to the word- and sentence-level features, passage-level features are also influential on comprehension. In particular, text cohesion is an important, but often overlooked aspect of complexity. Text cohesion refers to the extent to which connections across ideas, events, or relations within the text are explicit (O'Reilly & McNamara, 2007). Theories of text and discourse suggest that more cohesive texts support comprehension because they require less inferencing. When texts have “cohesion gaps,” readers must make an inference to connect the ideas. Less skilled and less knowledgeable readers can struggle to make these necessary inferences, which, in turn, impede comprehension (e.g., McNamara et al., 1996; O'Reilly & McNamara, 2007; Ozuru et al., 2010). Take, for example, the following sentences: “All plants are eukaryotes. Their cells are surrounded by cell walls.” The connections between these two sentences are implicit, and it is difficult to connect the pronoun in the second sentence to the correct noun in the first without relevant prior knowledge. Changing the passage to “All plants are eukaryotes. Eukaryotes are organisms that have cells that are surrounded by cell walls.” increases cohesion and helps the reader to more easily connect the idea from Sentence 1 to the idea in Sentence 2. This example reveals the importance of referential cohesion. Referential cohesion refers to the degree of overlap between persons or objects from sentence to sentence. For an example of deep and referential cohesion in a text, see Appendixes A and B (adapted from McNamara et al., 1996).

Comprehension can also be supported or hindered through deep cohesion, which refers to the degree of overlap in ideas across the passage (e.g., Graesser et al., 2011). When texts jump from idea to idea, it is harder to maintain a coherent representation and to make connections across the text. Despite the importance of cohesion in reading comprehension, informational science texts tend to be inconsiderate in maintaining cohesion (e.g., McNamara, 2001). Hall et al. (2016) demonstrated that manipulating texts to have more referential cohesion led to middle school readers answering questions with increased accuracy and speed. These findings with the focal middle school population replicate results from research with child and adult readers (Best et al., 2005; Ozuru et al., 2010). Thus, understanding the effects of text cohesion is valuable for understanding how features of text complexity may contribute to how middle school readers process text for successful comprehension.

Multiple Aspects of Text Complexity for Middle School Readers
Although the existing research described above implicates each of these different aspects of text complexity on reading comprehension, there is limited existing research that links how multiple features of text complexity affect reading comprehension processes in tandem. That is, the aforementioned body of research indicates that text features at the word, sentence, and passage levels are related generally to comprehension (e.g., Best et al., 2005; Frantz et al., 2015; Sadoski et al., 2000); however, such text features are not typically examined together. This is likely because these manipulations are intended to isolate a particular linguistic feature; however, this does not reflect real work reading in which a given text varies along multiple dimensions at once.

More specifically, there is little work on how these aspects of text complexity affect middle school readers who are still grappling with informational science text comprehension. These studies also tend to report on how features of text relate to postreading outcomes (e.g., comprehension test scores). Fewer studies have examined how these features influence the processes that occur during reading.

The Current Study
The current study explores the extent to which features of text complexity in informational science texts contribute to the reading comprehension processes of seventh grade readers. Previous studies have examined how individual features of text complexity (e.g., syntactic complexity) contribute to the comprehension with adults (Ozuru et al., 2010) and children (Hall et al., 2016), yet such literature rarely addresses how word-, sentence-, and passage-level features of text complexity may collectively affect readers' comprehension. Furthermore, explorations of text complexity most often examine the products of reading comprehension (e.g., recall), rather than explaining the relations between text complexity and readers' online comprehension processes (e.g., inferences, paraphrases), and particularly within the context of middle school readers.

Research Question
The current study extends the literature to understand how features of complexity in informational science texts contribute to the online comprehension processes of seventh grade readers. We address this aim with the following research question: To what extent do features of text complexity in informational science texts contribute to the online comprehension processes seventh grade readers use during a think-aloud task?

Our efforts are exploratory, and our intent was not to conduct a rigorous experimental manipulation, but rather to understand how comprehension processes unfold while middle school students read informational science texts that vary along multiple dimensions of complexity. That is, rather than experimentally manipulating texts, we examined how middle school students read texts that varied naturally. Furthermore, our efforts undertake a deep exploration of text complexity so that the field may develop a greater understanding of the factors that contribute to middle school readers' comprehension of informational science texts.

Method
Participants
We recruited seventh graders (N = 30; Mage = 13 years, 10 months; SDage = .57; 53% female, 46% male) from a city in the southeastern United States from a local charter school following institutional review board approval. Participants identified with the following racial demographics: 87% Caucasian, 7% African American, 3% Asian, and 3% Hispanic. The participants' school or district did not provide socioeconomic status and other demographic data. Additionally, the school or district did not provide information pertaining to all participants' main and first language use, visual and hearing abilities, in addition to any information regarding developmental disabilities, speech and language disabilities, or learning disabilities.

Participants and their guardians provided informed assent and consent, respectively, after teachers provided parents with recruitment materials at their school. Data collection occurred in a quiet, familiar setting at the participants' school with a trained graduate student researcher (GRA).

Materials
Informational Science Texts
We selected and matched two texts for use with seventh grade readers. We selected these texts through consultation with the participating school's science teachers, the school site's science curriculum map, and middle and secondary education specialists in a higher education teacher-prep program. Additionally, we sought texts whose content aligned with life sciences because the topic of life sciences is embedded in statewide seventh grade science standards. The two texts, one on the topic of Ecology and the other on the topic of Animal Growth, reflect authentic informational texts that seventh graders would likely encounter in their classroom.

We used Coh-Metrix (Graesser et al., 2004; McNamara et al., 2014) to evaluate the complexity of each text. Coh-Metrix is a text analysis tool that draws from computational linguistics and natural language processing to analyze features of text that are related to comprehension. Coh-Metrix reports both component scores and individual analyses for more than 100 indices related to features of language. In addition to reporting descriptive statistics (e.g., number of words) and common readability metrics (e.g., Flesch Reading Ease and Flesch–Kincaid grade level), Coh-Metrix uses multiple lexicons, parts-of-speech classifiers, syntactic parsers, and latent semantic analysis (LSA) to measure features of language at the word, sentence, and discourse level. For example, Coh-Metrix uses the Medical Research Council (MRC) database (Coltheart, 1981), a “dictionary” that includes counts of letters and syllables as well as human judgements of familiarity, concreteness, meaningfulness, and perceived age of acquisition of nearly 100,000 words to evaluate the lexical features of text. Coh-Metrix is particularly apt for the current application because of its focus on measuring text cohesion. These evaluations are conducted using LSA (Landauer, 2002). In brief, LSA uses corpora of texts to estimate the overlap between ideas (rather than specific words). Texts that have more overlap from sentence to sentence or from paragraph to paragraph are more cohesive. Coh-Metrix has been validated in a number of studies, demonstrating that Coh-Metrix indices accurately predict human judgments of high and low referential cohesion and of text difficulty (McNamara et al., 2006).

For our analyses, we selected relevant indices based on the extant research described above. In addition to descriptive measures (length as indicated by word count and sentence length) and readability (Flesh–Kincaid Grade Level), we also included word concreteness to reflect lexical variation, syntactic simplicity as a measure sentence level complexity, and both referential and deep cohesion to capture important variation at the passage level. Table 1 shows the text analysis generated by Coh-Metrix for the Ecology and Animal Growth texts.

Ecology text. The first text, “Ecosystems – The Kelp Forest” (i.e., Ecology text) originated from a middle-grade science activity book and defined an ecosystem of the kelp forest (Wood, 2008). The Ecology text is 45 sentences, is 846 words, and has a Flesch–Kincaid grade level of 9.6. The other linguistic Coh-Metrix indices reveal that the Ecology text uses more abstract words, is more syntactically complex, has high referential cohesion, and has relatively low deep cohesion (see Figure 1).

Animal Growth text. The second text, “Explaining Factors that Influence Animal Growth” (i.e., Animal Growth text), originated from a Grades 6–8 science workbook (DiSpezio et al., 2018). The Animal Growth text delineated how animals change and evolve in single and multiple generations due to genetics and the environment. The Animal Growth text is 29 sentences, is 422 words, and has a Flesch–Kincaid grade level of 9.8. Figure 1 also depicts that the Animal Growth text uses more concrete words, is less syntactically complex, has high deep cohesion, and has low referential cohesion.

Notably, although these texts are roughly matched in terms of shallow measures of complexity (i.e., readability grade level), they are quite different in their composition in terms of the other linguistic indices that may drive students' comprehension processes as they read the text. Both texts were printed with one sentence on each page, and the texts were placed in a binder for the think-aloud task.

Measures
Think-Aloud Task
A think-aloud task allows researchers to examine reading comprehension processes during reading (e.g., Coté & Goldman, 1999; Ericsson & Simon, 1993; Magliano et al., 2007, 2011; McNamara & Magliano, 2009; Wolfe & Goldman, 2005). This think-aloud protocol was modeled from previous studies (e.g., Carlson et al., 2014). During the think-aloud, we presented each text sentence by sentence and participant responses were recorded. Participants were typically told “Today, I would like you to read some texts, but in a different way. For this activity, you are going to read some texts out loud one sentence at a time. Each time you read a sentence, you will tell me what you are thinking.” Participants were told to say whatever they are thinking, even if it seems obvious, because there are no right or wrong answers. Additionally, there were no time requirements or limits for how long a participant can think out loud during the task. Participants were not interrupted during a think-aloud task; however, if they did not speak after reading, they were prompted with one cue, “Tell me what you are thinking.” General comprehension questions were asked at the end of each think-aloud text.

Lead researchers trained research assistants to administer the think-alouds. Training of think-aloud administration consisted of an afternoon of reading through the protocol and script with each other and practicing the administration before working with the participants.

Procedure
The research assistants administered the think-alouds in a quiet one-on-one setting familiar to the participants. The presentation order of the texts was counterbalanced across conditions.

The GRAs explained and modeled thinking aloud on a practice text used in other think-aloud research (Jimmy and the Bike; Goldman & Varnhagen, 1986, Suh & Trabasso, 1993; Trabasso & Suh, 1993; van den Broek, 1989) to help students become acclimated with thinking aloud. First, the experimenter read and thought aloud about six practice text sentences, and next, the participant was given the opportunity to practice thinking aloud for the remainder of the text (seven sentences).

Next, participants read the selected Ecology and Animal Growth texts (counterbalanced). The experimenter placed a binder between the experimenter and student, and the experimenter turned each page after the student gave a think-aloud response. Participants read both texts aloud in one session that lasted roughly 60 min. The experimenters recorded the verbal think-aloud responses and answers to the comprehension questions for later transcription and coding procedures.

Transcription and Coding of Think-Aloud Responses
Researchers transcribed the participants' recorded verbal responses from the think-aloud task. The research team collected a total of 60 transcribed think-alouds because each 30 participants completed two think-alouds.

Coding
The entirety of what a participant said after each sentence was coded as a single response. In other words, each participant generated 45 verbal responses for the Ecology text (the Ecology text was 45 sentences long) and 29 responses for the Animal Growth text (the Animal Growth text was 29 sentences long).

Previous think-aloud research with children and adults influenced the current coding scheme (Carlson et al., 2014; McMaster et al., 2012; van den Broek et al., 2001). The coding scheme included the following codes: connecting inferences (CI), elaborative inferences (EI), evaluative comments (EV), paraphrases (PAR), metacognitive comments (MC), and associations (AS). Table 2 details each of these codes with examples of corresponding student responses.

Two lead researchers trained two research assistants to code for these six processes. During the first training session for this coding scheme, the coders learned the codes and their definitions/explanations, as well as examples of coded responses from other texts. The lead researchers addressed any relevant discussion and answered questions during this first training session. Coders completed two practice transcripts independently once they understood the codes. The lead researcher also coded these transcripts. During the second training session, the lead researchers and coders discussed the two practice transcripts to determine reliability, as well as to discuss and resolve discrepancies.

All four coders (i.e., two GRAs, two lead investigators) coded 20% of the total think-aloud protocols. Light's kappa, which calculates multirater agreement across rater pairs and is then averaged, was calculated across the four raters (Light, 1971). Raters demonstrated strong reliability (Light's k = .90).

The two research assistants independently coded the remaining think-aloud protocols. Both raters scored all protocols. Discrepancies were resolved via group deliberation. Discrepancies often occurred when coders considered two codes potentially appropriate for a student's response; however, in our coding scheme, one response received one corresponding code. To deliberate such discrepancies, our team reached consensus by determining the most saliently employed comprehension process in the response, or which process appeared most informative. For example, the following student response illustrates how two comprehension processes could be at work simultaneously.

Text: Factors Explaining Animal Growth

Student Response: This is the title that tells me that animal growth has factors explaining it.

Here, a student is evaluating the text structure (i.e., an EV), but also paraphrasing the title of the text (i.e., a PAR). In this instance, our team deliberated that this would be an EV because the evaluation of the title is driving the PAR.

Results
Given that the two texts were of different lengths, the number of responses varied as a function of text. Because of this different length, the number of comprehension processes would have been distributed inequitably across the two texts. We transformed the mean number of each comprehension process to proportion scores to equitably compare the comprehension processes used between the two texts. For example, the mean number of evaluations generated in the Ecology text was divided by 45 (the total number of lines in the text), and accordingly, the mean number of evaluations generated in the Animal Growth text was divided by 29 (the total number of lines in the text). We used the proportional means as a method for comparing the comprehension processes in each text. See Table 3 for descriptive statistics that demonstrate the transformation of our scores to proportional means. Figure 2 shows the proportion of each type of comprehension processing statement as a function of the two texts.

Overall, readers' think-alouds were dominated by the comprehension processes of elaborative inferences and paraphrases and showed little evidence of associations and metacognitive comments. Critically, the proportions of each type of statement varied as a function of the text. To examine these patterns statistically, we first conducted a 2 (text: Ecology, Animal Growth) × 6 (processes: connecting inferences, elaborative inferences, evaluations, paraphrases, metacognitive comments, associations) within-subjects analysis of variance, with proportion score as the dependent variable. Due to the fact that these are proportion scores, there was no main effect of text, F < 1.00. However, there was a significant main effect of processing type, F(5, 29) = 39.76, p < .001, ηp2 = .58. This was qualified by a significant Text × Process interaction, F(5, 145) = 7.04, p < .001, ηp2 = .20.

Follow-up pairwise comparisons revealed that the two texts yielded significant differences in the proportions of connecting inferences, elaborative inferences, evaluations, paraphrases, and metacognitive statements (ps < .03). There was no effect of text on the proportion of associations (p = .30). Thus, students produced more connecting and elaborative inferences when reading Animal Growth than when reading Ecology. By contrast, they generated more paraphrases, metacognitive comments, and evaluations when reading Ecology compared to Animal Growth. Figure 2 depicts the proportional means of comprehension process use across both texts (*p < .05).

While these statistical analyses provide evidence that the different features of each text afforded different types of processing, it is difficult to discern why these patterns emerge from purely quantitative analysis. Our intent here is not to present a formal qualitative analysis, but instead provide some examples to contextualize the relations between text complexity and students' processing.

Consider this example of an elaborative inference prompted from Animal Growth,

Line of text: At least 12,000 years ago, humans began to domesticate members of a wolf-like species.

Student elaborative inference: Humans began to domesticate members of the wolf like species that could've become dogs like domestic dogs.

This student is able to understand the basic tenet of the text, in addition to generating an elaborative inference. The student extrapolates that the domesticated “wolf-like species” is most likely today's domestic dogs. The student's inference is bolstered by previous knowledge about human history and the domestication of dogs. Furthermore, the simplicity of the language (both in terms of syntactic simplicity and word concreteness) may have supported the student's ability to engage in this elaborative inference. Conversely, the following example depicts a student's response to a line of text with complex syntax and abstract words:

Line of Ecology text: While an ecosystem consists of many animals and plants living together in the same environment, a habitat is the living place (home) of one specific organism, characterized by its physical and biological properties.

Student paraphrase: Ecosystems do consist of a lot of animals and plants living together, but a habitat is where one specific organism lives.

Here, the student reads a sentence with multiple, complex clauses that employ abstract and potentially unfamiliar words like “organism” or “characterized” and the student generates a response that is indicative of paraphrasing. The student restates words used in the text, and while this may help the student put the text into their own words, there is little new information added to the response from either previous sentences or from prior knowledge. Thus, perhaps the complex syntax and abstract language prevented this student from engaging in higher order processing behaviors, such as inferencing, and instead relied on processing like paraphrasing as a means for understanding the text.

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to explore how middle school students process informational science texts and how different aspects of text complexity might affect these comprehension processes. To evaluate text complexity, we used a text evaluation tool, Coh-Metrix, to measure the following features: readability, word concreteness, syntactic complexity, and cohesion. After measuring the complexity of the informational science texts, we compared middle school readers' comprehension processes using a think-aloud task while reading an Ecology text and an Animal Growth text.

In summary, although the Ecology and Animal Growth texts were roughly matched for traditional indices of text complexity (readability), our results indicated that there were some consistencies in students' processing of the informational science texts, but also there were systematic differences across the two. Moreover, with further evaluation of the features of these texts, we found that the text written with concrete words, simple syntax, and high deep cohesion (i.e., Ecology text) elicited more inferencing than the text written with abstract words, complex syntax, and high referential cohesion (i.e., Animal Growth text). This finding suggests that specific features of each text afforded different types of processing. These differences are consistent with the extant research demonstrating how aspects of language at the word, sentence, and discourse level might impact text comprehension processing (Carnine & Carnine, 2004; Eason et al., 2012; McNamara et al., 2014). Further discussion of these findings is considered below.

Assessing Multiple Features of Complexity Across Informational Science Texts
We identified features of text complexity at the word, sentence, and passage levels of two authentic, informational science texts, and it appears that such features of text complexity may influence the types of comprehension processes that middle school readers utilize to understand these texts. Although, we cannot declaratively state whether an individual text feature or a constellation of features contributed to the comprehension process used with our readers, our study warrants further investigation of text complexity's effects on middle school comprehension processing.

Nevertheless, our results depict a snapshot of the challenges in a single text, and as such, this study highlights the need for educators to consider the multifaceted nature of text and text complexity. Text features vary exponentially and may conflict with reader characteristics, thus creating additional pitfalls for comprehension. For instance, texts with complex features across multiple levels of text (e.g., abstract words, complex syntax, and low cohesion) may encourage different types of processing than texts with complex features at one level (e.g., concrete words, complex syntax, and high cohesion). Unfortunately, the collective complexity of informational science texts across word, sentence, and passage levels is seldom evaluated in research and educational settings. Often, researchers and educators rely on quick measures or measures already completed (e.g., readability), as a proxy measurement of text complexity; however, readability assesses text complexity at word or sentence levels alone and fails to capture the entire scope of potential challenges embedded within texts. There is a growing push to move beyond simplistic measures of readability (Crossley et al., 2008) and instead reconceptualize readability to include a broader array of features that reflect multiple dimensions of text complexity (Crossley et al., 2011, 2008, 2019). Thus, even though traditional measures of text complexity are valuable, our study provides initial evidence for considering features of text across multiple levels (i.e., word, sentence, and passage). Such deeper examination of text features may offer constructive insight for how to utilize text materials to foster successful comprehension.

Middle School Readers' Science Text Comprehension Processing
Our results demonstrate that features of text complexity across multiple levels of text may induce specific comprehension processes middle school readers employ in order to understand what they read. For instance, inferencing is a driving process in text comprehension across development (e.g., Kintsch, 1988), and inferences are generated through the synthesis of two components: an activation of words and concepts in the text with an activation of reader prior knowledge (Kintsch, 1988). Our results suggest that modifying text features may alleviate the need for a reader's reliance on knowledge concerning the text alone (e.g., deciphering multiple meaning words or connecting text to knowledge). Furthermore, the inverse may be true about reading some texts with complex words, syntax, and text cohesion, and consequently, paraphrases, metacognitive comments, and evaluations would be used more often than inferences. This concept can be applied to our results at the word, sentence, and passage levels of science text.

At the word level of text, we found that the Animal Growth text was written with more concrete language than the Ecology text and elicited more inferencing than paraphrasing. One possible explanation for this is that concrete words are easier to understand (Sadoski et al., 2000), and thus, texts with a greater number of concrete words may enable readers to apply their prior knowledge solely for inference generation, rather than deciphering the definitions of abstract words. The inferencing processes of our participants reading the Animal Growth text may have been augmented due to this phenomenon. In contrast, readers may have engaged in more paraphrasing while reading the Ecology text because they needed to comprehend abstract or unfamiliar words, in addition to extracting meaning from the current sentence and previously read text. Although useful, paraphrasing is a restatement of the text, and as such, readers often rely on paraphrasing when a text is difficult to comprehend. More specifically, school-age readers that struggle with comprehension may rely on paraphrases more than any other comprehension process (Carlson et al., 2014; McMaster et al., 2012) and perhaps this is because their efforts are preoccupied with understanding features of word level text complexity, rather than inference generation.

The amount of syntactic complexity present at the sentence level of a text may also be related to the ease of inference generation. In our study, the simpler syntax present in the Animal Growth text may have induced greater inference-making because readers did not need additional knowledge of grammar to unpack or understand complex syntax within the text. Instead, readers were able to allocate processing resources (i.e., prior knowledge) toward inference generation, and focus on developing an adequate understanding of the text. Whereas with the Ecology text, the more complex syntax may have prevented readers from engaging in inferencing because readers were engaged in deciphering the syntax, and rather than generating inferences, readers generated paraphrases, metacognitive comments, and evaluations.

The comparison of cohesion in each text provides another example depicting how features of text complexity may influence inference generation in middle school science readers. The text with a higher rate of deep cohesion, the Animal Growth text, which prompted significantly more inferencing, is compelling. Deep cohesion is the rate at which texts explicitly connect ideas, events, and relationships (McNamara et al., 2014), and a text with deep cohesion reduces the need for the reader to monitor events as they read. Thus, the reader is able to process text with less dependency on their understanding of text events, and instead, the reader can partake in other knowledge-based comprehension processes, like inferencing.

Previous research indicates that features of text complexity including word concreteness, syntactic complexity, and text cohesion individually contribute to comprehension outcomes (Best et al., 2005; Frantz et al., 2015; Sadoski et al., 2000). Our work extends the existing literature in suggesting that features of text complexity embedded within science texts may individually and collectively contribute to the rate at which middle school readers engage in specific comprehension processes while reading informational science texts. As a result, features of science text complexity across all levels should be carefully considered when text materials are matched to students. Thus, due to the exploratory nature of this study, further rigorous inspection of the relationship between comprehension process use, especially during reading, and individual and collective features of text complexity across additional texts is warranted.

Clinical Significance
We have several findings that are worthy of attention for speech-language pathologists. First, accounting for text complexity in science texts is a fruitful enterprise. Our findings support previous research indicating that science texts vary across several levels of complexity, including semantic, syntactic, and passage, or discourse levels (e.g., Snow, 2002). Our findings are an extension of this literature in suggesting that different aspects of text complexity may induce specific reading comprehension processes. Clinicians already conceptualize oral discourse into domains that include semantic and syntactic language (Bloom et al., 1975). Similarly, we suggest that clinicians can evaluate reading materials when targeting science texts for therapy use. Despite the body of research highlighting the comprehension challenges related to understanding science texts, science texts are often poorly understood and lack adequate evidence for use in therapy by clinicians (Lundine & McCauley, 2016).

Evaluating the levels of text complexity in therapy materials is important because texts are rarely simultaneously difficult at the word, sentence, and passage levels, and further, some levels of text complexity may be particularly challenging for specific clients. For instance, a child whose therapy goals are focused on vocabulary growth may benefit from reading a syntactically simple text in order to focus on comprehension of science vocabulary. Additionally, clinicians can supplement potentially poor matched classroom texts with more optimal science texts for use in small-group therapy sessions. These supports could compensate for lost comprehension opportunities in the classroom, thus offering additional, calculated supports for students.

Our findings also introduce cohesion, an additional tool for clinicians to use for evaluating the passage level text complexity of therapy materials. Although it is not always feasible to directly measure text cohesion, a rough evaluation of the relatedness of ideas and referents within a text may guide clinicians in selecting science texts that can best support student comprehension and learning. Further research is needed to help provide clinicians with more usable tools to measure text cohesion in order to better understand science texts and effectively use them in therapy with middle school readers.

Limitations and Future Directions
This study offers exploratory data about how informational science text complexity may prompt middle school readers to generate specific types of reading comprehension processes while reading. Our results support ongoing research in several related fields; however, it is worthwhile to acknowledge some limitations with regard to our findings. First, a methodological limitation of this study is the reliance upon thinking aloud. The mere act of asking people to think out loud can alter the way that they engage with the reading task and is limited in capturing the conscious thoughts that the reader is able to sufficiently articulate (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977). Future work can consider other ways of measuring concurrent processing (e.g., McCarthy et al., 2018).

A second important, but intentional, limitation was a focus on naturally varying texts rather than experimental manipulation. This prevents us from making causal claims, but also reflects a more ecologically valid examination of the role of text complexity in middle school students' comprehension. We also acknowledge that matching texts requires the training and utilization of tools like Coh-Metrix and practitioners may not have access and time to conduct such evaluations. Thus, future efforts should be made to best explore how to provide practitioners with ways to identify text complexity for their clients.

Additionally, although our results reiterate the importance of accounting for text complexity across word, sentence, and passage levels, we do not address how these levels of complexity may influence readers who struggle with comprehension. Specifically, we do not focus on how text complexity may affect those with individual comprehension skill differences (e.g., Carlson et al., 2014; McMaster et al., 2012), as well as populations served by speech-language pathologists and special educators. Individual readers with varying diagnoses that frequently co-occur with comprehension deficits (i.e., developmental language disorder, reading disability) may be affected by text complexity in unique ways independent from their peers. Thus, future work should explore the rate and type of comprehension processes that different struggling readers generate when reading texts with varying profiles of text complexity. For instance, previous research has shown that subgroups of struggling readers tend to use different comprehension processes during reading (e.g., Carlson et al., 2014, McMaster et al., 2012); however, this work could be extended by further exploring these tendencies with texts with differing levels of text complexity.

Conclusions
This study highlights the importance of accounting for text complexity at word, sentence, and passage levels when selecting informational science texts for middle school readers. This is important for multiple reasons: State and national educational standards dictate that middle school students read an increasing number of science texts as they age through middle and high school (Common Core State Standards Initiative; NGSS Lead States, 2013); informational science texts are often complex and challenging for middle school readers (Best et al., 2005); and of specific relation to this study, certain features of text complexity may prompt the generation of specific comprehension processes. Our findings showcase how accounting for multiple levels of text complexity in informational science texts may offer additional ways for clinicians to leverage therapy tools for optimizing student supports. Still, more research is needed to educate clinicians and educators about the utility and evidence behind employing texts for use in therapy and interventions (Lundine & McCauley, 2016; Pearson et al., 2010). The connection of text complexity and reader comprehension processes may be a generative line of research for understanding how middle school readers comprehend informational science texts and how clinicians and educators can best support them in that enterprise.