Recurrence Quantification Analysis as a method for studying text comprehension dynamics

ABSTRACT 
Self-explanations are commonly used to assess on-line reading comprehension processes. However, traditional methods of analysis ignore important temporal variations in these explanations. This study investigated how dynamical systems theory could be used to reveal linguistic patterns that are predictive of self-explanation quality. High school students (n = 232) generated self-explanations while they read a science text. Recurrence Plots were generated to show qualitative differences in students’ linguistic sequences that were later quantified by indices derived by Recurrence Quantification Analysis (RQA). To predict self-explanation quality, RQA indices, along with summative measures (i.e., number of words, mean word length, and type-token ration) and general reading ability, served as predictors in a series of regression models. Regression analyses indicated that recurrence in students’ self-explanations significantly predicted human rated self-explanation quality, even after controlling for summative measures of self-explanations, individual differences, and the text that was read (R2 = 0.68). These results demonstrate the utility of RQA in exposing and quantifying temporal structure in student’s self-explanations. Further, they imply that dynamical systems methodology can be used to uncover important processes that occur during comprehension. 

KEYWORDS 
reading, text comprehension, dynamical systems theory, recurrence quantification analysis, self-explanation 

1	INTRODUCTION 
Theories of reading comprehension generally assume that deep comprehension of text comes from the construction of a coherent mental model [1,2]. This mental model is a network of interrelated ideas that reflect both the information found explicitly in the text as well as semantically-related ideas from the earlier parts of the text and the reader’s prior knowledge. Features of the text, such as overlap between ideas and structural cues, affect the activation of concepts across the network. Importantly, these features are not uniformly represented across a text; thus, activation dynamically waxes and wanes as readers process text and discourse [3,4]. Additionally, these processes change based on metacognitive states of the learner and the knowledge that can be used to generate explanations for the text [3,5]. The changes in these processes suggest that comprehension should be examined from a perspective that can account for these complex dynamics 
[e.g., 6,7] 
Dynamical systems theory (DST) provides a principled theoretical framework for studying the complexity and temporal variations in comprehension processes [e.g., 8]. In this paper, we draw on theoretical and methodological tools from DST to gain a deeper understanding of comprehension’s time course. The current study combines natural language processing (NLP) and DST to capture the temporal characteristics of the selfexplanations that students generate as they read. In part, we replicate the work in [6], in which a DST method, Recurrence Quantification Analysis, was used to demonstrate that temporal dynamics of students’ self-explanations predict their eventual comprehension of text. We extend this work with a new dataset and further the understanding of the temporal aspects of the comprehension process. Specifically, this study investigates how the recurrent patterns that occur across multiple self-explanations relate to the average quality of the self-explanations.  
1.1	Text Comprehension as a Dynamic Process 
Dynamical systems are composed of multiple interacting components and evolve within a phase space, a coordinate system whose axes correspond to the variables (i.e., order parameters) needed to characterize the ongoing state of the system in question [9]. Importantly, a key characteristic of these systems is that the patterns they produce cannot simply be reduced to their component properties. Instead, these higher-order patterns, or attractors, emerge from the process of self-organization. That is, patterns emerge, stabilize, change, and dissipate as a natural consequence of local interactions among the system’s lower-level components as well as any constraints placed on the system. Constraints may be random fluctuations from the environment or parameters of the system (non-specific control parameters) that when tuned to critical points result in a qualitative change in an observable variable (order parameter). Interaction of system components results in properties that are observable features of data and provide clues to the underlying system dynamics [10]. 
A simple illustration helps to make these ideas concrete. This example is not provided as a template for the dynamics expected to emerge from students’ natural language patterns, as these processes generate patterns that are far more complex (e.g., [6,11,12]. Nonetheless, a commonly referenced system in the motor control literature is the one that forms with alternate swinging of the limbs [13,14]. At slow speeds, two patterns dominate, an inphase pattern where the angle between the limbs is 0°, and an antiphase pattern where the angle between the limbs is 180°. However, faster speeds result in a phase transition such that only one pattern, 0°, remains stable. In this simple example, the phase relations between the limbs are the patterns (i.e. attractors) that emerge from the interaction of the systems’ components, the limbs. The singular control parameter is the speed of the limbs. When speed reaches a critical point, the system exhibits a qualitative change in behavior: the elimination of the 180° pattern. This simple system captures several properties of a dynamical system (e.g., attractors, control parameters, order parameters, and phase transitions) [9,10], but also tacitly emphasizes time as an important feature of dynamical systems, a feature that plays an important role in the identification and analysis of patterns in students’ natural language responses. 
There is now considerable evidence that DST can be applied in a variety of psychological [9,15,16] and educational [17] settings. 
A full review of that literature is beyond the current scope; however, there have been several studies to reveal dynamic properties of comprehension processes [6,7,18-24]. While most studies that have applied DST to reading comprehension have focused on reading times, recent work has demonstrated application of DST directly to text [6,7]. Of particular relevance is the work applying DST to assess the nature of students’ selfexplanations [6]. 
Self-explanation provides an ideal space to explore the dynamics of comprehension. Students who self-explain construct more coherent mental models and subsequently learn more from the text [25-30], particularly when they use effective comprehension strategies [31,32]. Self-explanations not only promote comprehension, but can also provide windows into ongoing, dynamically evolving processes. Self-explanations are sensitive to mental model construction and reflect the impact of a variety of individual differences on comprehension [3,33]. Importantly, self-explanations are also sensitive to the text structure, metacognitive states, and the knowledge that can be used to generate explanations for the text [3,5].  
Our assumption is that the content of students’ selfexplanations provides a suitable order parameter for exploring emergent comprehension processes. We hypothesize that patterns found in the words that students produce will provide a unique window into the dynamic processes so often assumed to undergird the comprehension of text. To test the utility of DST approaches for understanding on-line comprehension processes, we explored data collected in the context of a self-explanation tutoring system, iSTART. 
1.2	iSTART  
The Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking, or iSTART, is an intelligent tutoring system (ITS) designed to improve reading comprehension through selfexplanation training [34,35]. Prompting students to explain the text to themselves as they read has been shown to increase the generation of inferences and the comprehension of complex, informational texts [26]. Importantly, self-explanation skills can be improved through training and practice [31,32]. iSTART uses video lessons, Coached Practice, and game-based practice to help students generate high quality self-explanations. Students first watch a lesson video about the purpose and value of self-explaining. They then view videos about five effective reading comprehension strategies: comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing, predicting, bridging, and elaboration. After a brief summary video, students are transitioned to a round of Coached Practice. During Coached Practice, students read texts are prompted to generate self-explanations at various target sentences. After each self-explanation, they receive a summative score and formative feedback from a pedagogical agent and are given the opportunity to revise. Students complete one full text in Coached Practice and are then transitioned to the practice environment in which they can engage in more Coached Practice or two types of game-based practice: generative and identification games. In the generative games, students earn points and insystem currency (iBucks) for writing high quality selfexplanations. iBucks can be used to customize the environment or to play the identification games. In the identification games, students identify which of the five strategies is being used in an example self-explanation. iSTART has been shown to improve comprehension for middle school [36], high school [37,38] and college students [39,40].  
1.3	Assessing Self-Explanations 
The assessment of self-explanations is critical to the feedback cycle within iSTART. Self-explanations can reveal comprehension processes that occur during reading [e.g., 3,5,31]. Important to the current work, the way in which these self-explanations are assessed can reveal different aspects of these processes. In the following section, we review some common approaches to analyzing self-explanation data. Then, we focus attention on a relatively new time series analysis tool developed in the study of dynamical systems, Recurrence Quantification Analysis.  
1.4	Conventional Approaches 
In iSTART, self-explanations are automatically scored to assess quality and to provide actionable feedback for improvement. Selfexplanations can be reliably evaluated by both humans and natural language processing tools [34,41].  
One method of scoring is identifying the presence, accuracy, and sophistication of various comprehension strategies. For example, a self-explanation might include information that is paraphrased from the text, but also include elaboration. This elaboration is then scored for whether information comes from domain knowledge or general knowledge, such as personal experience [42]. Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [43,44] can also be used to identify the types of strategies students generate in their protocols [45,46]. 
In iSTART, students’ self-explanations are given scores from 0-3 that reflect the use of different strategies. The algorithm is based on human ratings of self-explanations. As shown in Table 1, scores of 0 and 1 indicate lower-level processing, such as paraphrasing the target sentence. Scores of 2 or 3 indicate that the student has generated an inference, either connecting ideas from across the text or by integrating information from prior knowledge [47]. 
This 0-3 human rating is the basis for the iSTART selfexplanation scoring algorithm. This algorithm relies on natural language processing (NLP) tools to identify linguistic features that are predictive of these scores. Word-based indices (e.g., response length, content-word overlap) are used as an early filter to identify 0 and 1 self-explanations. LSA is used to determine how ideas in the self-explanation relate to ideas in other parts of the text or relevant prior knowledge [36]. The algorithm is as accurate as humans in providing a summary of cognitive processes involved in comprehension [41,47]. 
Both the human scores and algorithms are designed to assess individual self-explanations. This is useful for providing feedback on each trial, but provides a relatively small window of information in terms of learning analytics. Students’ performance is generally measured by averaging their self-explanation scores across a text or even across multiple texts in a training session. Such an approach allows for a more holistic view of student comprehension, but it ignores temporal variations and the natural patterns and structures in the students’ language that can be indicative of comprehension.  
More recently, a number of studies have explored the use of “aggregated self-explanations” to provide a richer data set with which to assess readers’ comprehension processes [6,48,49]. For example, Allen et al. (2017) demonstrated that dynamical analyses of a student’s aggregated self-explanation and summative word metrics accounted for 32% of the variance in comprehension scores for that text.  
In the current work, we explore how the temporal structure of self-explanations relates to text comprehension in two ways. Our first aim is to replicate findings in [6] with a new data set to demonstrate that indices obtained from dynamical analysis of selfexplanations predict overall post-reading text comprehension scores. Second, we seek a better understanding of how these recurrent patterns relate to on-line comprehension processes that emerge during reading. Toward this objective, we leverage Recurrence Quantification Analysis to assess the degree to which these dynamical indices in aggregated self-explanations relate to the quality of students’ self-explanations.  
1.5	Recurrence Quantification Analysis 
Repeating patterns are fundamental characteristics of many complex, dynamical systems [50]. These patterns range in complexity from simple sinusoids to fully realized chaos [9], and many methods are available to characterize time series structures [51-56]. However, most dynamical methods impose strict assumptions about the time series in question (e.g., stationarity, long time series). The recurrence plot was introduced to address those potentially limiting assumptions [57]. Since then, a powerful theoretical and methodological framework has developed that permits the study of dynamical systems regardless of time series properties or their generating processes. This general framework called Recurrence Quantification Analysis has proven to be an indispensable asset in varied domains such as: cognitive science, complexity science, learning analytics, linguistics, and physiology [e.g., 6,7,12,57-67].  
In the following paragraphs, we introduce both the recurrence plot (RP) and its quantitative extension, Recurrence Quantification Analysis (RQA). In both cases, our presentation generally unfolds within the context of text analysis.  However, an important point to make is that recurrence plots and RQA were both originally developed in the study of continuous-time dynamical systems. This point is made because application of RQA to other forms of behavioral data common to the learning analytics community (e.g., eye movements, reading times, or physiological data) requires additional methodological steps not considered in our treatment. For that reason, we refer the reader to [65] for a review of this more general form of RQA but also to other classic treatments on attractor reconstruction [e.g., 51,68]. 
 A recurrence plot (RP) is a valuable tool for visualizing the temporal evolution of dynamical systems [e.g., 7,57,65]. Its purpose is to capture instances when a dynamical system revisits similar points in phase space. As a non-technical but still valid introduction to the construction of recurrence plots for text series, consider the following sentence (numerals above words are positional indices):  
 
1 	2 	3 	4 	5 
Imagine 	an 	imaginary 	menagerie 	manager 
 	 	 	 	 
6 	7 	8 	9 	10 imagining 	managing 	an 	imaginary 	menagerie. 
 
This sentence contains 10 words but only 7 of those words are unique. The phrase “an imaginary menagerie” first appears at positions 2-4 but then repeats at positions 8-10. That is, the text contains a recurrence of this three-word phrase.  
Figure 1 is the RP for this simple example and provides a visualization of the recurrent structure just described. The words in the series are placed on both the horizontal and vertical axes and are represented by their positional indices. Recurrent points are plotted whenever a word is repeated and produce a plot that is symmetric about the main diagonal. Here, the main diagonal may be regarded as a simple reminder of the identity relationship between the series that form the horizontal and vertical axes. Note that the main diagonal is relevant in some bivariate and multivariate forms of RQA [65,69]. In the present case, however, only the off-diagonal elements are important for interpretation. Off-diagonal points represent recurrent words (i.e., the word “an” appears at both positions 2 and 8). Sequences of points that are parallel to the main diagonal are called lines and represent longer sequences of words that repeat over time (e.g., “an imaginary menagerie”). 
The preceding example illustrates both the ease and utility of visualizing recurrent structure in text, allowing for qualitative descriptions of temporal dynamics [57]. While these qualitative descriptions can be useful, often the patterns observed in recurrence plots are not easily described and subtle structure may be difficult to resolve by visual inspection alone. Recurrence quantification analysis addresses those problems by providing several metrics to quantify the structure found in recurrence plots. These indices provide additional information about the underlying dynamics implied by recurrence plots and allow for statistical comparison across recurrence plots and experimental conditions [65,67]. Below, we provide descriptions for several common RQA indices. 
Recurrence Rate (RR). Recurrence rate is arguably the most common RQA metric and is given by the ratio of the number of recurrent points to the square of the length of the time series. This metric effectively captures the overall tendency for recurrence while ignoring specific patterns or clustering.  
Determinism (DET). Determinism measures how frequently recurrent points fall on diagonal lines, ignoring the main diagonal. Specifically, DET is the percentage of recurrent points that fall on a line. 
Number of Lines (NRLINE). This measure is simply a count of the number of recurrent sequences of length ≥ 2. 
Average Line Length (L). Lines are considered as diagonal structures, parallel to the main diagonal, consisting of two or more recurrent points. However, line lengths may vary considerably from this baseline definition. Average line length provides a measure of central tendency, the typical line length found in a recurrence plot.  
Maximum Line Length (MAXLINE). This metric captures the length of the longest diagonal sequence of recurrent states. This measure provides information about the stability of underlying attractor dynamics. This measure also provides a theoretical connection to the larger dynamical systems literature: maximum line length is inversely proportional to the Largest Lyapunov Exponent, a widely use index of attractor stability [51,68]. 
Entropy (ENTR). Entropy provides a complimentary measure of the stability of recurrent structures, and is given by the Shannon [70] entropy of the distribution of the line lengths in the recurrence plot. Entropy reaches a maximum in the case of randomness and minimum in the case of a completely ordered system.  
Normalized Entropy (rENTR). This index normalizes Shannon entropy based on the number of recurrent lines that are observed in the recurrence plot. 
1.6	The Current Study 
Previous work suggested that dynamical indices can serve as strong predictors of text comprehension at multiple levels (e.g., text-based, bridging, and overall). In this study, our aim is to expand on the findings in [6] by demonstrating that dynamical patterns also predict self-explanation quality, even after considering individual differences, summative measures and the influence of the text itself. 
2	METHODS 
2.1	Participants 
The participants were 232 (147 female; Mage = 15.90) current high school students and recent high school graduates from the southwestern United States. The sample was 48.7% Caucasian, 23.1% Hispanic, 10.7% African-American, 8.5% Asian, and 9.0% identified as other ethnicities. Participants were given financial compensation for their participation in the study. 
2.2	Procedure  
These data were collected during the pretest of a larger, fivesession study. Participants first completed a demographic questionnaire that included items regarding age, ethnicity, native language, and prior knowledge. They then completed the GatesMacGinitie Reading Test [71], which is a standardized comprehension assessment. Participants then read one of two texts (Red Blood Cells and Heart Disease) that have been used in previous research [72,73] These texts were of similar length (311 and 283 words, respectively) and were matched for linguistic difficulty using both Flesch-Kincaid [74] that assesses surface features and Coh-Metrix [75] that assesses syntactic and semantic aspects of readability. For each text, participants were prompted to self-explain for nine target sentences and then answer eight open-ended comprehension questions. Half of these questions were designed to assess surface, or textbase comprehension and the other half were designed to assess deeper comprehension that relies on connecting information from different parts of the text or integrating information from prior knowledge. 
2.3	Data Processing 
The self-explanations were scored from 0-3 using the rubric in Table 1. Two raters independently scored a random subset of 10% of the self-explanations and achieved acceptable reliability (Cohen’s kappa = .844). These raters then scored the remainder of the self-explanations. 
To generate and quantify the recurrence plots, all nine of each students’ self-explanations were combined into a single aggregated self-explanation. This aggregated self-explanation time series was cleaned by removing punctuation and converting all words to lower case. Each word was then stemmed and assigned a categorical numeric code. For the example sentence given earlier – Imagine an imaginary menagerie manager imagining managing an imaginary menagerie. – the categorical numeric code would be (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 2, 3, 4).  
In addition, we also computed three summative measures of self-explanation: number of words, average word length, and type-token ratio. The purpose of these indices was to determine whether the RQA indices provided unique predictive power of the self-explanation scores over basic summative metrics. 
3	RESULTS  
3.1	Qualitative 
Recurrence plots provide useful visualizations of recurrent structures. In this section, we contrast two examples of recurrence plots. The recurrence plots presented in Figures 2 and 3 represent the structures obtained from aggregated self-explanations that were deemed to be of average (Figure 2), and high (Figure 3) quality. In this section, we discuss the differences between these two recurrence plots in order to foreshadow the quantitative results reported in in the subsequent section. Before proceeding, though, a cautionary note is in order. It is often tempting to make value judgments when qualitatively assessing recurrence plots. Researchers are sometimes biased to evaluate obvious structure as ‘good’ and more subtle patterns as ‘bad’. As will be seen, however, assessment of Figures 2 and 3 and the text characteristics they imply suggest that the patterns found in recurrence plots must always be considered within the context of the behavior they represent. 
The qualitative assessment begins with Figure 2 and the obvious regularity with which diagonal line segments appear across the plot. Closer inspection reveals that the lines are generated from a sequence of words that recur with a period of about 25 words. This level of periodicity relative to the overall number of recurrent points leads one to expect that Determinism might be quite high for this participant. However, as noted in the preceding paragraph, it is vitally important to consider recurrence plots in context. Here the context is self-explanation of text, and while, one would naturally expect some repetition of words and phrases as students work to make inferences [cf. 6], this level of regularity is surprising and likely suspect. Inspection of actual text for this participant reveals the origin of the pattern – the majority this participant’s self-explanation began with exact same five words, “This is sentence is saying that…”. Thus, while the explanations are of enough length, the number of substantive words (i.e., related to the actual text) are relatively limited. This overly rigid form of self-explanation may explain, at least in part, why this student’s self-explanations were not, on average, evaluated as being high quality. 
The patterns in Figure 3 provide a stark contrast to the structure observed in Figure 2. The strong periodicity of Figure 2 has been replaced by patterns far less regular. Despite the lack of obvious structure, this student’s self-explanations were consistently judged to be high in quality. Moreover, even without any strict periodicity, a complex structure is apparent. Viewing Figure 3  from left to right reveals in the upper triangle several clustering patterns interspersed with seemingly random collections of recurrent points. The implication of Figure 3 when considered together with Figure 2 is that the student who generated Figure 3 fluctuated between bursts of repetition and bursts of novel text production. In the next section, we explore how quantitative analysis of recurrence plots echoes these descriptions and provides deeper insight into the quality of selfexplanations. Specifically, we report on statistical analyses involving individual differences, summative measures, and RQA indices in order to understand the relative role of each in the prediction of self-explanation quality.  
3.2	Quantitative 
Our central questions connect online cognitive dynamics to the quality of self-explanation. In this section, we provide descriptive statistics of RQA indices and then we demonstrate how these features predict human ratings of self-explanation quality, after controlling for reading ability and text. Allen et al. [6] showed that RQA indices (e.g., Number of Lines and Maximum Line Length) were strong predictors of comprehension test scores. Here, we conduct several quantitative analyses to investigate the relations between RQA indices and average self-explanation quality.  
Pearson correlations were computed between the average human ratings of self-explanation quality and RQA indices presented in Section 1.5. Number of Lines and Maximum Line Length were both heavily skewed; hence, logarithmic transformations were applied to both of those variables before further analysis. Pearson correlations between RQA indices and SE Quality appear in Table 3. Correlations between RQA and comprehension scores were included for replication of and comparison to results in [6].  
We further explore those relationships while simultaneously considering individual difference measures as well as summative measures of the self-explanations (i.e., number of words, mean word length, and type-token ratio). As students read one of two texts, we also included a dummy variable (0 = Heart Disease, Red Blood Cells = 1) to account for differences as a function of text. These variables along with the RQA indices listed in Table 3 were entered into a stepwise regression model. Self- explanation quality, averaged across an entire text, was the dependent variable. The model was significant, F(5,225) = 94.55, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.68, and retained five predictors. The predictors for the final model are given in Table 3 along with standard errors and t statistics.  
This final model obtained from stepwise regression generated several notable findings. For instance, none of the summative variables were retained, suggesting that RQA indices were stronger predictors of self-explanation quality. The results further show that, after controlling for the text that participants read and the three RQA indices, a one standard deviation increase in reading ability predicted a 0.07 point increase in average selfexplanation quality. Likewise, after controlling for reading ability and RQA indices, the model indicated participants who read the red blood cells text produced self-explanations 0.15 points higher in quality than participants who read the heart disease text. Two of the RQA indices had negative coefficients. A 1 percent increase in RR predicted a 0.27 decrease in average self-explanation quality and a 1 percent increase in DET predicted that average selfexplanation quality would decreased by 0.02. In contrast, a one unit increase in log number of lines predicted a 0.39 increase in average self-explanation quality. This latter result seems somewhat surprising given the negative relations between selfexplanation quality and the other two RQA indices. We return to these seemingly conflicting results in the discussion but preview that treatment by suggesting that inversely signed coefficients for the RQA indices may be capturing the difference between simple repetitions of phrases and recurrent structure indicative of deeper forms of comprehension. 
The results from the stepwise regression revealed which features explained the most variance in self-explanation quality. The stepwise regression procedure was followed up by conducting a hierarchical regression in order to understand the relative contributions of the retained predictors to the overall model fit.  
A hierarchical regression was conducted to further explore the predictive value of RQA indices after accounting for individual differences and text. All models included human ratings of selfexplanation quality, averaged across an entire text as the dependent variable. Model 1 included reading skill (GMRT), and a dummy variable representing the between-subjects effect of text (i.e. Red Blood Cells and Heart Disease). GMRT was normalized prior to further analysis to aid in interpretation. The overall model was significant, F(2,228) = 20.51, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.15. The model further indicated that average SE Quality did not differ as a function of text (β = -0.07, SE = 0.06); however, GMRT was a significant predictor (β = 0.19, SE =0.03, p < 0.001) suggesting that, after controlling for the text participants read, a one standard deviation increase in reading ability predicts a 0.19 point increase in average SE Quality. Model 2, in addition to reading skill and the between subject variable of text, included as predictors the three RQA indices retained from the stepwise regression procedure: log of number of lines, recurrence rate, and determinism. The addition of the RQA indices improved model fit, F(3, 225) = 122.11, p < 0.001, ΔR2 = 0.53. Collectively, the models presented in this section imply that RQA indices are strong predictors of self-explanation quality, even after accounting for reading ability and the eccentricities of reading a particular text. 
4	DISCUSSION 
In this study, students generated self-explanations while reading one of two scientific texts. Individual self-explanations were evaluated for overall quality by expert raters and were later submitted to RQA in order to expose and quantify recurrent patterns of words that emerged across time. The results of the current study are consistent with those in [6] demonstrating that dynamical systems theory approaches can be leveraged to provide information about critical comprehension processes above and beyond that of more traditional summative measures. Further, they extend these findings by revealing that the recurrent patterns in students’ natural language responses were predictive of the quality of the self-explanations.  
The current results demonstrate how these measures provide additional insight into the structure of recurrence plots of selfexplanation time series. In particular, the combination of reading ability, the text students read, and three RQA indices (log of number of lines, recurrence rate, and determinism) accounted for 68% of the variability in average self-explanation quality. RQA indices alone accounted for 53%. The large amount of variance accounted for by RQA indices is demonstrable evidence in favor of exploring the temporal aspect of self-explanations. 
The recurrence plots displayed in Figures 2 and 3 showcase the method’s ability to distinguish between self-explanations that differ in quality. The student whose self-explanations were judged to be of average quality exhibited an overt form of regularity; the high performing student generated a complex recurrence pattern reminiscent of systems that exhibit deterministic chaos [67]. Deterministic chaos refers to a form of variability found in nonlinear dynamical systems, including human physiology [76]. Such systems are said to exhibit apparent randomness, that is, they seem to vary randomly from one moment to the next but actually have a complex form of structure. Importantly, these systems are strike a balance between order and disorder, a characteristic implied by the observed pattern of coefficients discussed next. 
In addition to overall model fit, the signs of coefficients in the above models reveal important information about the relationship between recurrent word use and self-explanation quality. Of particular note is that Determinism and Recurrence Rate had negative signs while log number of lines had a positive coefficient. These results seem somewhat contradictory given that all three measures are related to the amount of recurrent structure present in a plot. To interpret these findings, refer back to the recurrence plots explored in Section 3.1. The predictable pattern of oscillation led us to suppose that Determinism would be high in Figure 2. The lack of such regularity in Figure 3 suggests the opposite, although Figure 3 does contain a substantial amount of recurrent words that are arranged in short diagonal lines. RQA indices for those two graphs bear out those descriptions – Determinism and Recurrence Rate were higher in Figure 2 than Figure 3, but Figure 3 had larger number of lines. 
The dissimilarity in recurrent structure in those two figures follows the same pattern as the coefficients in Table 4. How might these patterns be explained within the context of self-explanation quality? The results suggest that producing high quality selfexplanations requires striking a balance between repetition of previously referenced material and novel elaboration. This result is consistent with a great deal of literature on skillful coping in the dynamical systems literature [77-80] The findings in those papers suggest that adapting to the task at hand requires finding an optimal balance between being overly random and overly rigid. More plainly, the results suggest a high proportion of determinism or recurrence alone could be indicative of an overly rigid pattern of self-explanation. In contrast, having a large number of lines while keeping the overall recurrence rate and determinism low suggests that students may be striking an optimal balance between revisiting concepts encountered earlier in a text (i.e., making bridging inferences) and producing novel text (i.e., elaboration). Indeed, these results are consistent with the work in text comprehension suggesting that deep comprehension requires the construction of a mental model that has information from prior knowledge integrated with the information provided explicitly in the text.  
The explanation we have offered for this pattern of correlations is not the only one possible. We have interpreted results based on the combination of regression coefficients and recurrence plots for average and high performing students. Recurrence plots were chosen to emphasize the sometimes surprising patterns observed for students who produce selfexplanations of differing quality. Given the relation between the recurrence plots and the regression coefficients, it is possible that some form of nonlinear relationship exists among the recurrence metrics and average score. Such relations, however, were not among our original hypotheses and will require further study. 
In sum, the comprehension processes that underlie how students read and learn from text demonstrate dynamical properties that can be captured by methodologies that are sensitive to changes over time. Assessing these properties can reveal increasingly nuanced information about what students know and the strategies and processes in which they engage. Additionally, Recurrence Quantification Analysis provides powerful qualitative and quantitative information that can be used together to model student performance.  
4.1	Applications and Future Directions 
The promise of this exploratory modeling of student performance in terms of recurrent text structure suggests a number of possibilities for future research and applications. Both the current results and the results in [6] suggest that the temporal structure of self-explanations may be a powerful predictor of reader comprehension. This further suggests that it may be possible to enhance tutoring systems such as iSTART to deliver more rapid and accurate feedback to both students and instructors. As Figure 2 suggests, RQA could alert instructors to situations when students are ‘stuck’ in suboptimal patterns of explanation. Similarly, RQA could be leveraged to generate automated feedback directly to the student. The techniques presented here could also be used to augment adaptive features in intelligent tutoring systems, delivering tailored learning experiences to students in real (or near real) time.  Those efforts are encouraged by success in real-time applications of tools inspired by dynamical systems theory in other domains such as team communication [89] as well as ongoing work involving the new StairStepper module in iSTART [90]. If so, then analytical tools such as RQA may allow us to develop training tools that are not only user-centered but tailored to temporally dynamic states of the user. 
RQA is a subset of a larger dynamical systems analytical framework that involves both categorical and continuous time series [51-56]. Future work will explore the utility of this approach in time-varying categorical and continuous linguistic features extracted from constructed responses. These features will include other categorical data such as parts of speech [12] but will also extend capabilities of RQA to capture nuances in students’ selfexplanations by exploring the temporal variation in continuous linguistic features such as word frequency or topic similarity. A particularly exciting future direction will involve investigating the simultaneous evolution of multiple linguistic features using joint recurrence quantification analysis.  
Lastly, we note that the application of dynamical systems theory to reading comprehension assessment is still in its infancy. Our future efforts will involve leveraging this vast theoretical and methodological framework in order to model comprehension processes more directly and at more fine-grained levels. For instance, we have recently begun investigating how random walk theory may provide insight into the time-course of selfexplanation quality [91].  The success of the current approach across so many other settings suggests dynamical systems theory in conjunction with rigorous reading comprehension theory as a powerful source of principled learning analytics. 
