The effects of domain-specific knowledge on (re)reading a literary short story. 

Abstract: This study was designed to address the issue that student readers often struggle to generate the interpretive inferences needed for successful literary comprehension. Participants (n = 60) thought aloud as they read a short story. They were assigned to a 2(instruction: control, literary information) × 2(think-aloud: first pass, rereading) design. Providing readers with information about how to engage with a text in a literary way as well as an opportunity to reread and reexamine the story showed modest benefits for increasing interpretive inferencing. These findings have implications for how to help students to develop and use strategies that can support their understanding and enjoyment of literary works.

Introduction
Literary reading invites the construction of interpretive inferences about the deeper meanings of the work and reflection on the literary or aesthetic qualities of the work (e.g., McCarthy, 2015; Levine, 2019). However, students rarely make interpretive inferences as they read and often find literary foregrounding (i.e., stylistic variations) that experts appreciate to be dense and confusing (e.g., Claassen, 2012; Graves & Frederiksen, 1991; Peskin, 1998; Zeitz, 1994). In order to develop effective interventions to support the use of literary-appropriate reading strategies, there needs to be a better understanding of the domain-specific literary knowledge that supports the construction of interpretive inferences (Lee & Goldman, 2015). 
McCarthy (2015) drew upon empirical studies of literature and theories of discourse comprehension to argue that literary experts possess not only knowledge that literary reading invites interpretation (e.g., a domain-appropriate reading goal), but also knowledge of relevant conventions and themes that support the construction of interpretive inferences. Rabinowitz (1987) refers to the shared knowledge between author and reader as literary rules: knowledge of conventions reflect Rules of Notice and knowledge of themes reflect Rules of Signification. Prior work has demonstrated that providing short background readings that describe relevant Rules of Notice and/or Rules of Signification prior to reading a story can improve their literary reading strategies. More specifically, these manipulations decrease student readers’ reliance on close-to-text paraphrasing and encourage more interpretive inferencing (McCarthy & Goldman, 2019). Further, readers given information about the literary rules report higher ratings of enjoyment and appreciation of the story. These studies suggest that introducing novices to domain-specific literary knowledge can support more literary-appropriate interpretive processing. 
The current work builds upon these studies to further examine ways to support novice literary readers in producing interpretive inferences. In the current study, we reduce the number of pre-reading conditions to include only the extremes (no information vs. information about both literary rules) and increase the sample size afford the use of inferential statistics. Critically, we also included a rereading manipulation. Rereading was assumed to support interpretive inferencing for two reasons. The first reason comes from research in discourse processing examining how readers construct mental models of what they read. Millis and colleagues (1998) demonstrated that comprehension processes during first reading are dedicated to constructing a textbase or gist representation of the text; whereas, upon rereading, resources are shifted to construction of inferences that support a more robust situation model. By the same logic, some have argued that novice readers may refrain from generating interpretive inferences during their initial readings of a text because they need to first construct literal aspects of the mental model before they are able to consider nonliteral meanings. The second reason comes from literary theory which suggests that rereading, or multiple readings, can allow readers to reexamine and appreciate literary qualities of the text (e.g., Dixon et al., 1993). In either case, the opportunity to reread should enhance readers’ propensity to engage in more literary-appropriate processes, especially if they are given information that can support the generation of interpretive inferences. Thus, the current study aims to answer two research questions: (RQ1) To what extent does providing information about literary rules change readers’ processing of a literary short story? Based on prior think-aloud studies (e.g., Burkett & Goldman, 2016; Claassen, 2012; Graves & Frederiksen, 1991), we predicted that students in the no information control condition would produce think-alouds dominated by paraphrasing. We predicted providing students with pre-reading information that informed them of relevant Rules of Notice and Rules of Signification would decrease the amount of paraphrases and increase the generation of interpretive inferences. We also anticipated that increased knowledge of how to make sense of the text would enhance their enjoyment and appreciation of the story. (RQ2) Does a rereading opportunity augment the effects of providing literary information? We hypothesized that an opportunity to read the text through once prior to thinking-aloud would allow readers to allocate more resources to complex inferences. Thus, readers may be better able to leverage the literary information on a second pass of the story. We also predicted that the opportunity to reread would increase readers’ enjoyment and appreciation of the story (Kuijpers & Hakemulder, 2018). 
Method
Design & Procedure 
Students (n = 60, Mage = 27.18, SD = 7.18) from an urban university in the southeastern United States read and thought aloud about the short story The Elephant by Slowomir Mrozek. Participants completed the study one at a time in a one-hour session. Due to continued social distancing protocols, data were collected via videoconference.  Participants were given a think-aloud instruction to verbalize as if they were “turning up the volume” on their thoughts as they read (e.g., Peskin, 1998). The experimenter modeled a think-aloud and then participants were given the chance to practice until they felt comfortable thinking aloud. Participants were randomly assigned to a 2(instruction: control, rules) × 2(think-aloud: first pass, rereading) between-subjects design. In the control condition, participants were only given the title of the story. In the Rules condition, participants were given information about relevant Rules of Notice (deviation from the norm, disruption, juxtaposition) used in the story and Rules of Signification (participants were told that the text was a satire and were given an explanation of what satire is). Participants in the first pass condition were prompted to think-aloud during their first reading of the story. Participants in the rereading condition were instructed to read the text silently before being prompted to think-aloud during their second reading. After reading, participants answered three appreciation items. Participants rated (1-7) the extent to which they agreed with the following statements: “Is this story an example of good literature?”, “Did you enjoy reading this story?”, and “Would you recommend this story to someone else to read?” (Dixon et al., 1993). Participants then completed a 20-item true/false comprehension test designed to measure readers’ literal understanding of the story. Finally, the participants completed the Author Recognition Task (ART; Acheson et al., 2008) which is designed to measure print exposure.
Procedure
Think Aloud Coding
Participants’ think-alouds were transcribed and parsed into idea units and coded using a simplified rubric from Whaley and McCarthy (2020). The rubric includes four categories. Paraphrases reflect restatements of content that is explicit in the text. Text-based inferences reflect a broad range of statements in which the participants are generating inferences to maintain a story-world representation of the text (e.g., “he obviously is trying to cut corners and use the money for himself or use to basically boost his ego”, “So it sounds like because the director misled the kids […] seeing it disappear made them believe that elephants just aren’t real”). Interpretive inferences are statements that go beyond the story world to identify nonliteral meaning (“it makes me think that maybe this is metaphorical for something else”) and to understand the author’s possible intention or meaning about the world at large (“There is some definite political statements that are being made through the subtext”). All other kinds of statements, including metacognitive monitoring statements (“Okay I’m a little confused”) and personal associations (“I have rabbits at my backyard”) were collapsed into an other category. Two researchers coded a random subset of 20% of the think-alouds, achieving good interrater reliability (weighted kappa = .75) and then independently coded the remaining think-alouds.
Results 
Preliminary Analyses
ART scores (M = 10.46, SD = 9.28) reveal low print exposure relative to prior reports of undergraduate samples (Acheson et al., 2008 report M = 22.70 of 65), but consistent with their status as non-experts. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) test revealed no significant differences in ART score across the conditions, Fs < 1.00, indicating no a priori differences in readers’ print exposure. Comprehension score was calculated as proportion correct. Participants scored highly (M = .90, SD = .07) and the ANOVA revealed no differences in comprehension score across the conditions, all Fs < 1.00. 
On average, participants’ think-alouds included less than 1000 words (M = 944.28, SD = 390.71). An ANOVA revealed no significant differences in think-aloud length, although the effect of rereading approached significance, F(1,56) = 3.59, p = 0.06. This pattern suggested that those who had already read the text once silently prior to thinking aloud (reread condition) generated slightly longer think-alouds (M = 1039.33, SD = 422.76) than those who were asked to think-aloud on their first pass of the text (M = 849.23, SD = 336.39).
Think-Aloud Processes
The omnibus 2(instruction: control, rules) × 2(think-aloud: first pass, reread) × 3(process: paraphrase, text-based inference, interpretive inference) mixed ANOVA revealed a significant three-way interaction, F(2,112) = 6.45, p < .01 (Figure 1). To follow up this significant effect and to address RQ1, we first examined participants who thought aloud during their first pass of the story. Consistent with prior work, there was a main effect of process type, F(2, 56) = 46.86, p < .01, such that participants generated significantly more paraphrases than text-based inferences and more text-based inferences than interpretive inferences (Tukey HSD test ps < .03, Figure 1, left). However, there was no main effect of instruction condition, F(1, 28) = 2.24, p = .15, and the process by instruction interaction failed to reach significance, F(2,56) = 2.54, p = .09.
	To address RQ2, we then examined the effects of the instruction manipulation for the reread condition, who were given an opportunity read silently before thinking aloud. Consistent with the first pass participants, there was a significant main effect of process type, F(2, 56) = 41.60, p < .01, such that there were significant differences across all three types of processes (Tukey HSD tests, ps < .01). There was, again, no main effect of instruction condition, F < 1.00. However, these results were qualified by a significant process by instruction interaction, F(2, 56) = 3.93, p = .03. A t-test indicated significant differences in the proportion of paraphrases in the predicted direction such that participants given literary rules prior to reading and thinking aloud generated a smaller proportion paraphrases than those given no information, t(28) = -2.13, p = 0.04. There was no effect of information condition on the proportion of text-based inferences, t(28) = 1.14, p = 0.26. Finally, a t-test for the proportion of interpretive inferences as function of information condition failed to reach significance, t(28) = 1.88, p = 0.08. However, the low overall rates suggest a possible floor effect. Taken together, these results suggest that the opportunity to familiarize themselves with the text prior to thinking aloud increased the predicted effects of the literary information instructions.
	
Appreciation Measures
The omnibus ANOVA indicated a significant three-way interaction, F(2,110) = 4.33, p = .02. Follow-ups indicated no effects for whether the story is good literature (Q2) or whether they would recommend the story to a friend (Q3; all ps > .10). By contrast, there were significant differences across conditions for ratings of enjoyment (Q1; Table 1). More specifically, there was a significant main effect of information condition F(1, 17.07) = 9.52, p < .01, such that readers given literary rules information prior to reading found the story more enjoyable than those given no pre-reading information. These findings partially support our prediction related to the effect of literary instruction, but not rereading (e.g., Dixon et al., 1993; Kuijpers & Hakemulder, 2018).
Discussion
This study replicated previous work showing that knowledge of literary conventions and themes 1) affects how readers approach the text, such that they engage in less paraphrasing and slightly more interpretation and 2) increases enjoyment of the story. The study also extends this research by demonstrating that novice readers may be better able to leverage this domain-specific knowledge when given the opportunity to reread. These findings are consistent with the idea that rereading allows readers to focus their efforts on higher-order comprehension processes once an initial foundation has been laid and that revisiting a story gives a reader the opportunity to reexamine their understanding and gain new insights. Future research should examine reader processes in more fine-grained ways to better understand what drives these rereading effects and future development of instructional activities and interventions should consider emphasis on and opportunities to reread stories to help students to leverage their literary-specific knowledge and enact relevant comprehension processes. 
