Knowledge: A Fundamental Asset

Abstract
When students learn, they activate, use, revise, and acquire knowledge. As such, knowledge is a fundamental asset. We advocate for an asset-based approach which capitalizes on students’ knowledge through prompts and activities that invite learners to leverage what they already know. Considering knowledge as an asset means that educators must consider multiple aspects of knowledge rather than just the amount of knowledge related to a target domain. This chapter explores how knowledge can be conceptualized across multiple types (e.g., explicit vs. implicit, declarative vs. procedural, metacognitive, epistemological, disciplinary, formal vs. informal) and dimensions (i.e., amount, accuracy, specificity, coherence) and how acknowledging and responding to the multi-faceted nature of knowledge supports learning.  Effective learning comes from capitalizing on what a student already knows and engaging the student in active, knowledge building which results in more meaningful and long-term learning.

Keywords
knowledge, learning, knowledge building, assessment, multidimensional, cognition, comprehension, misconceptions, asset vs. deficit
 

 
Introduction
Knowledge is a fundamental concept in education. Indeed, we typically think of learning as the acquisition of knowledge. This knowledge is then used to solve new problems and to support future learning. Knowledge begets knowledge. Hence, understanding what knowledge is, how it can be measured, and how it can be used in future learning is a critical foundation for educators. In this chapter, we first define knowledge in the context of information processing and mental model building with emphasis on knowledge as an asset. We then describe the multifaceted nature of knowledge and how different types and dimensions of knowledge can be assessed and how these qualities of knowledge relate to learning. Finally, we explore how an asset-based approach to knowledge building can enhance learning and provide recommendations for how educators can help students to leverage what they already know to build their knowledge base.
Defining Knowledge
We intuitively think of our knowledge as all of the information that we have learned in the past, our past experiences, our skills (e.g., reading, writing, math, riding a bike). It is the stuff that is in there, and the stuff that we try to find when we need to complete a task, answer a question, or simply think about an event. In the field of education, knowledge is the objective: educators strive to increase students’ knowledge of various topics (e.g., history, science) and their ability to complete various tasks (e.g., solve math problems, write an essay, read a complex science text). The objective is to enhance students’ ability to demonstrate their knowledge and use and apply their knowledge flexibly across multiple situations.
The study of knowledge has a rich history across a variety of fields. Indeed, there are few fields of study that do not contemplate the nature of knowledge . For our purposes, we define knowledge as “all of the information stored in one’s memory” (McCarthy & McNamara, 2021; see also Greene, Sandoval & Braten, 2016). This information may be correct or incorrect, coherent or incoherent, and the information may be more or less accessible in a given situation. Knowledge is also not the process or success of accessing information, but rather it is all of the information that is potentially available from long-term memory. 
In educational research and practice, a central objective is to increase learners’ knowledge and to make that knowledge more accurate and more coherent. Newly learned knowledge becomes prior knowledge, which can then be leveraged in future situations to create new knowledge. Thus, in addition to measuring what a student has learned in a given task or unit, researchers and instructors are also interested in what a learner already knows before the activity begins, or their prior knowledge. Prior knowledge is a strong predictor of comprehension and learning (Dochy, Segers, & Buehl, 1999). Prior knowledge plays a role in a variety of processes involved in learning. Prior knowledge affects how people remember textual information (Bartlett, 1932) and how much information they recall (Bransford & Johnson, 1972; Langer & Nicolich, 1981). Prior knowledge affects how readers make use of comprehension strategies (Cromley & Azevedo, 2007; McNamara, 2004;). Prior knowledge also allows learners to more effectively process information and recall it more quickly (Graesser & Clark, 1985; Trabasso & van den Broek, 1985). Those with more knowledge are also better able to identify critical information (Afflerbach, 1990; Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981) and ignore irrelevant information ( McNamara & McDaniel, 2004: Voss, Vesonder & Spilich, 1980). Thus, knowledge is not only an outcome, but also a critical predictor of future learning. Considerations of knowledge are crucial to understanding student outcomes across the spectrum of disciplines and contexts (e.g., Goldman et al., 2016; Kendeou, Muis & Fulton, 2011). 
Knowledge: Deficit versus Asset
When we consider knowledge, it is important to consider whether we conceptualize it as a glass half empty or a glass half full. A deficit (half empty) model of knowledge dominates education and educational research. One considers what a student lacks in knowledge in order to fill those gaps -- because the objective is to remedy knowledge gaps or deficits by giving the students the knowledge that they lack. Alternatively, an asset model of knowledge attempts to discern the knowledge that a student has in order to capitalize and build upon it. 
No one comes into the picture completely lacking knowledge. A student who knows very little about science, still knows some things about the world, people, events, and relations. In a deficit framing, the goal of instruction would be to give student knowledge about science. By contrast, an asset-based approach aims to capitalize on the student’s knowledge about the world in order to build knowledge about science (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2005). The notion that we can give a student knowledge is a misconception about learning that has been reinforced by assumptions that giving lectures or having students read a textbook are (by themselves) sufficient for learning (McNamara, 2010). Unfortunately, that is not the case - students cannot merely consume knowledge. Knowledge is an asset to be built upon, capitalized, used, and enhanced. 
Asset-based approaches also emphasize the need to recognize culturally-bound knowledge. Work in culturally-responsive pedagogy highlights that minoritized students do not often see themselves or their lived experiences presented in the classroom and in the curriculum. This can suggest to students that the knowledge that they have is not important or relevant to the classroom context and can artificially suggest to instructors that these students lack knowledge and overlooking the cultural funds of knowledge that they do possess (Gay, 2018; Ladson-Billings, 2009; Moll et al., 1992). Culturally-responsive pedagogies argue for the recognition and leveraging of the knowledge that students have, rather than focusing on what they do not have. For example, the Cultural Modeling Framework (Lee et al., 2004; Lee, 2007) capitalizes on students’ informal knowledge and helps them to translate this knowledge to formal coursework (Risko & Walker-Dalhouse, 2007). 
Conceptualizing knowledge as an asset rather than a deficit has the potential to radically change education. Considering knowledge as an asset means that educators must consider multiple aspects of knowledge rather than just the amount of knowledge specifically related to a target domain. It means that educators must consider how to build upon knowledge, rather than simply add information. Here, we discuss how to measure knowledge from multiple angles as well as methods to prompt students to use the knowledge that they have in order to construct new knowledge. 
Measuring Knowledge
Measuring or assessing what a student knows involves not only what concepts are known, but also how those concepts are connected and organized in memory. In addition to understanding what information or how much information is available in long-term memory, researchers who study knowledge and learning are most interested in how information is organized or structured. How researchers measure knowledge reflects assumptions about how information is stored and represented in memory. Cognitive theories of comprehension and learning (e.g., Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; Johnson-Laird, 1989; Kintsch, 1988) suggest that knowledge can be represented in a connectionist network as a series of nodes (concepts) and links (relations). This network is conceptualized as a multi-layered, multi-dimensional mental model or mental representation. If a student were to read the sentence “The dog was asleep on the couch”, information such as “cat” and “living room” are likely to also be activated in memory through spreading activation because these terms are strongly connected to the nodes of “dog” and “couch”, respectively. The more and more connected information is, the easier it is for learners to activate and integrate that knowledge in future learning. Mental models that have more densely connected nodes are said to be more elaborated and more coherent. Thus, in order to measure knowledge, researchers explore the quality of the learner’s mental model. Of course, these mental models are not directly observable. Researchers use a variety of tasks and measures to make inferences about the nature of the learner’s mental model. 
Learning assessments are used to evaluate what a student has learned over time (e.g., a post-reading quiz and end-of-semester final exam). These assessments often use a variety of types of questions to assess different features of the learner’s mental model. Surface level questions (e.g., recall, definitions) are designed to evaluate what information is remembered to assess which nodes are present and available. Other tasks, such as inference verification, transfer, or application questions require the learner to integrate information. Thus, they are designed to target the coherence of the learner’s mental model. While researchers often carefully develop post-activity knowledge assessment, prior knowledge tests often consist of self-report items, vocabulary recognition, or multiple-choice tests to gauge general familiarity with the topic at hand. While these types of tests are easy to develop and administer, they are often less rigorous and are often not clearly aligned to measuring the various qualities of the learner’s existing mental model (Dochy, Segers, & Buehl, 1999; McCarthy & McNamara, 2021).
In order to evaluate the quality of a mental model, researchers must be sensitive to the fact that knowledge is multi-faceted and multi-dimensional. We borrow from de Jong and Ferguson-Hessler (1996) who argue that knowledge is comprised of different types of knowledge and that there are multiple qualities or dimensions of each of these types of knowledge. These different aspects of knowledge contribute to learning in different ways. Thus, a richer understanding of the nature of knowledge can help educators to consider which types or dimensions of knowledge are most critically relevant to a given learning task—again, not necessarily what is missing, but perhaps more importantly, what the learner and the learning environment brings to the table.
Types of Knowledge
Researchers have identified and distinguished between various types of knowledge (e.g., Alexander, Kulikowich & Schulze, 1994; Anderson, 1989; de Jong and Ferguson-Hessler, 1996; Dochy & Alexander, 1995; Kendeou & O’Brien, 2015; Tulving, 1972). Rather than drawing from a specific typology or taxonomy or providing an exhaustive list of the variety of terms and definitions, we describe the most commonly referenced types of knowledge. The boundaries between these types of knowledge can often be relatively fuzzy and the different types of knowledge are also not mutually exclusive.
One common distinction in whether the knowledge is explicit or implicit. Explicit knowledge is information that is in conscious awareness, whereas implicit or tacit, knowledge is assumed to be acquired and used without conscious awareness (Jacoby and Witherspoon, 1982). For example, a person might learn the words to a popular song without intentionally studying the lyrics or may not be able to consciously articulate the steps they take to stay upright on a bike. While explicit knowledge is easy to probe for, implicit knowledge is relatively challenging to assess because the learner may not recognize that they have the knowledge or they may be unable to clearly articulate or express that knowledge.
Perhaps the most familiar type of knowledge is declarative knowledge (Squire, 1992). Declarative, also sometimes called conceptual knowledge, refers to predominantly explicit knowledge about facts and concepts (semantic memory) as well as knowledge of personal and world events (episodic memory; Tulving, 1972). In the context of learning in formal settings, declarative knowledge is often considered the “content knowledge” that one possesses relevant to the current task. Declarative knowledge is “knowing what” or “knowing that”. By contrast, procedural knowledge refers to “knowing how” (Ryle, 1949). Procedural knowledge refers to knowing the sequence of steps needed to complete a task (e.g., riding a bike; long division). Often procedural knowledge is either gained implicitly or is taught explicitly and becomes more implicit, or proceduralized, over time. Procedural knowledge has largely been studied in the context of problem solving and mathematics (e.g., Anderson & Fincham, 1994; McNamara, 1995; Rittle-Johnson & Siegler, 1998). Relatedly, embodied knowledge is intrinsically tied to bodily perceptions and actions. Embodiment of concepts by linking them to perceptual and motoric movements can be used to facilitate meaning making and learning (Glenberg, 2011; Glenberg et al., 2007). 
Metacognitive knowledge refers to the “awareness and knowledge about one’s own cognition”(Pintrich, 2002, p. 219; see also Flavell, 1979). Metacognitive knowledge is the information about one’s own knowledge, such as whether you know more or less about one topic compared to another or how much you know as compared to the average person or a peer. Metacognitive knowledge also refers to knowledge of particular learning strategies and the conditions under which one would deploy the strategy or strategies. Knowledge of what one knows, or perhaps more importantly, what one does not know, can help guide learning. Thus, metacognitive knowledge and metacognitive monitoring play critical roles in theories of self-regulated learning (Griffin, Wiley, & Salas, 2013; Thiede, Anderson, & Therriault, 2003; Winne, 1996, 2018). 
Epistemological knowledge refers to the knowledge of “ways of knowing”. Measures of epistemological knowledge (see also epistemic cognition, epistemic thinking, epistemological beliefs, epistemic frames) evaluate the degree to which a person views knowledge as certain or uncertain, simple or complex, whether knowledge or truth is derived internally by the individual or externally through authority (e.g., Greene, Azevedo & Torney-Purta, 2008; Greene, Sandoval & Bråten, 2016; Hofer & Pintrich, 1997; Schommer, 1990; Wood & Kardash, 2002). A student’s epistemological beliefs can vary across topics and disciplines (Bråten et al., 2009; Buehl, Alexander, & Murphy, 2002). Further epistemic knowledge is predictive of performance across a variety of domains (see Greene, Cartiff, & Duke, 2018).
In some traditions, beliefs are considered to be a type of knowledge. A belief is generally defined as an individual’s acceptance that a statement or information is true or represents something that exists. As such, researchers and educators often view knowledge and beliefs as separate constructs; beliefs reflect a greater level of subjectivity and affect, whereas knowledge is often assumed to be more objective in nature (see Murphy & Mason, 2006). Research suggests that learners’ beliefs (including their general and topic-specific epistemologies and attitudes) influence the ways in which knowledge is accessed and applied (e.g., Bråten et al., 2011; List and Alexander, 2017; Schiefele, 1990). Thus, beliefs are undoubtedly an important part of the learning process, but reflect, at least to some extent, a distinct construct to consider in addition to knowledge.
In the context of education, another critical type of knowledge is disciplinary knowledge, or knowledge related to learning in a particular field, discipline, or domain. Disciplinary knowledge intersects with other types of knowledge in the sense that learners can possess knowledge within the discipline (e.g., declarative facts about a topic, procedural steps to complete a process), but also knowledge about the discipline or domain itself (e.g., epistemic frames, learning goals). For example, literary experts are not only more familiar with common literary themes and conventions, but they also have the knowledge that literary reading encourages nonliteral interpretation and exploration of how the language of the text works to invite that interpretation (McCarthy, 2015; McCarthy & Goldman, 2019). Learning can be particularly challenging when students’ domain-specific epistemological beliefs are mis-matched with the underlying assumptions in domains. For example, students may think of science as inarguable facts. Science experts, on the other hand, recognize that science is subject to multiple interpretations and theories as well as revisions based on new empirical findings (Bråten et al., 2011; Elby, Macrander & Hammer, 2016; Goldman et al., 2016; Lederman, 2007). Students whose knowledge does not align with this conception of the nature of science may have difficulty synthesizing across conflicting findings or reasoning between competing hypotheses.
Another important, but commonly overlooked distinction is the context in which the knowledge is gained. Knowledge can be acquired in formal learning environments (i.e., “school knowledge”). However, learners also acquire sophisticated knowledge from informal learning in everyday activities (Saxe, 1988; Scribner & Cole, 1973) . Thus, this distinction is not a feature of the information itself, but rather meta-information about the source of the knowledge. Informal knowledge is often more implicit in nature. Researchers are interested in how informal spaces can be used to enhance learning (e.g., museum science) as well as how educators can invite students to make their implicitly learned informal knowledge more explicit in formal educational settings.
Different assessments are more or less likely to tap into variations in each type of knowledge. For example, declarative knowledge is commonly assessed with multiple-choice questions with the assumption that answering correctly means that the learner knows this fact. By contrast, procedural knowledge is assessed as the ability to complete a task (e.g., ride a bicycle, complete a math problem, fly a plane, etc.). Both metacognitive knowledge and epistemic knowledge can be evaluated through self-report surveys (e.g., Mokhtari & Reichard, 2002; Schommer, 1990; Wood & Kardash, 2002), but these aspects of knowledge can also be assessed through interviews, verbal protocol tasks, as well as tasks that require the use of knowledge (McNamara, 2011; Millis et al., 2018).
Dimensions of Knowledge 
Although the majority of research in knowledge has been on these various types of knowledge described above, more recent work has emphasized the need to more closely examine different dimensions of these types of knowledge. The Multidimensional Knowledge in Text Comprehension Framework (MDK-C) Framework (McCarthy & McNamara, 2021) draws from notions of mental model building to argue that prior content knowledge varies along four intersecting dimensions: amount, accuracy, specificity, and coherence. It is of note that the framework was developed with respect to declarative content knowledge, but it is likely that these dimensions are also evident in other types of knowledge.
The amount of knowledge refers to the number of concepts in memory. More simply put, this dimension answers the question “how much knowledge does the learner have?”. Most measures of knowledge in research and education focus on estimating the amount of knowledge across various types of knowledge. Assuming that the items on a knowledge assessment are varied and well-rounded, the score on the test can serve as a relative measure of prior knowledge. That is, students who answer more questions on the knowledge assessment are assumed to know more than those who score less well. However, the MDK-C framework emphasizes that a focus on only how much a learner knows overlooks important other dimensions of that knowledge that can contribute to learning.
A second dimension is the accuracy of knowledge. In some philosophical views, knowledge refers only to information that is true in the world. However, more cognitive and education-focused approaches argue that what one “knows” may not be accurate (e.g., vaccines cause autism). Inaccurate knowledge may reflect inaccurate information that was intentionally passed along to the learner (i.e., misinformation, disinformation), but it also includes information that reflects a naive conception that was more implicitly drawn from misunderstanding everyday experiences (Vosniadou & Skopeliti, 2017). In order to measure the accuracy of knowledge, researchers often include distractor items that reflect common misconceptions or naive understandings. A common example of this is in multiple choice math problems. In addition to the correct answer, one of the choices is often a solution that the learner would arrive at if the learner did a procedure out of order. For example, in the problem “6 x 3 = ?”, one of the distractors might be “9”. If a student selects this answer, it suggests that the student might not know arithmetic signs or may not understand the difference between multiplication and addition. Inaccurate knowledge can impair comprehension and learning and can further perpetuate misunderstandings (Kendeou & van den Broek, 2005, 2007; Rapp & Braasch, 2014; van den Broek, 2010). Indeed, inaccurate information can be well embedded in individuals’ knowledge structures, and challenging to overcome or correct (Guzzetti, Snyder & Glass, 1992; Vosniadou, 2009). Just like the amount of knowledge, the accuracy of ideas in knowledge is assumed to be on a continuum. Knowledge of ideas may be more or less accurate and the connections between ideas may be more or less accurate. When a learner has many ideas and connections between ideas that contradict known truths, the misconceptions are more challenging to overcome. 
The third dimension of knowledge is its specificity in relation to the current task. Knowledge about the targeted topic is more specific, whereas general questions about the domain or world knowledge is less specific (e.g., Alexander, Kulikowich & Jetton, 1994; Alexander, Kulikowich & Schulze, 1994; McCarthy et al., 2018). The specificity of knowledge is not a static feature of the information. That is, a given node in the mental representation is not inherently general or specific, but rather that particular information might be more or less related to the topic at hand. For example, if a student is learning about the digestive system, questions regarding the digestive organs would tap into topic specific knowledge. The student may also have subject knowledge about anatomy more generally that may not be immediately relevant to the text, but can support the activation of relevant related information. It may also be important to consider the degree to which the students have more general science (domain) knowledge and also very broad general world knowledge as this more distal information can support additional knowledge activation that can facilitate processing as well as the integration and organization of new information.
The fourth dimension of knowledge is coherence, which most closely aligns with the notions of structure or organization of knowledge. We borrow the term coherence from theories of text and discourse to highlight the importance of interconnectedness of the information in the construction of an elaborated mental model. More connections facilitate knowledge activation, which in turn increases comprehension (e.g., Gernsbacher, 1991; Kintsch, 1988). The importance of coherence is also reflected in theories of expertise which posit that expertise is not defined by mere quantity of knowledge, but rather by how the information is organized (Alexander, 2004; Bedard & Chi, 1992; Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1986; Langer & Nicolich, 1981; Langer, 1984). Although coherence plays a critical role in learning, many assessments do not include high quality items that can probe for the coherence of the learner’s mental model. This is, in part, because assessing the connections between ideas is more complex than measuring whether or not a particular node of information exists in memory. In comprehension tests, researchers often use inference questions to assess the coherence of the learner’s mental model. Answers to inference items cannot be found directly in the text. Instead, the reader must connect information from different parts of the text or take the information from the text and apply it to a new scenario. The question “Which cell organelle makes proteins?” asks the learner to search their memory for a particular concept. By contrast, an inference question might ask “What would happen to a cell if there were no ribosomes?” This question is more likely to require the learner to draw upon what they know about the ribosome’s function in order to infer what might happen if they were removed. Other methods of evaluating coherence include card sorting tasks (which allow researchers to understand how a learner thinks that different concepts “go together”) and evaluating students’ open-ended responses (e.g., summaries, explanations, essays) and scoring them for organization or for the completeness or coherence of the written product (see McCarthy, Kopp, et al., 2018).
The MDK-C framework highlights that these different dimensions of knowledge exist in tandem and depend on one another, with complex interactive effects. For example, broad general knowledge may compensate for a lack of topic-specific knowledge (e.g., McCarthy, Guerrero, et al., 2018) or a coherent, but ultimately inaccurate understanding of a topic (i.e., a misconception) might be more difficult to overcome than a single inaccurate idea amongst a disparate network of loosely connected ideas (Chi, 2008). Considering multiple dimensions or aspects of knowledge will yield a more complete picture of what a student knows and does not know, and the potential effects on comprehension, learning, and problem solving. Different types of assessment measures are needed to capture the multidimensional nature of knowledge. In turn, more work is needed to better understand how these dimensions manifest across the various types of knowledge (e.g., explicit vs. implicit, declarative vs. procedural, metacognitive, epistemological, disciplinary, formal vs. informal). Considering these four dimensions potentially enhances the ability to more comprehensively evaluate the quality of learners’ mental models and make more nuanced predictions regarding how knowledge can or will be used in future tasks. 
Building Knowledge: Acquisition and Revision
Assessing what a learner knows before or after a learning activity is only one piece of the puzzle. These assessments serve as formative feedback that can be used to tailor future learning. However, this tailoring can be challenging for educators when they face a classroom of students who each possess varying aspects of prior knowledge or who may have inaccurate knowledge that could impede learning of future content.
Instructors often use lectures or background readings in an attempt to attenuate the effects of students’ varying levels of prior knowledge. Essentially, many assume that ‘giving’ students information renders their knowledge of the topic equivalent. However, such an approach is not particularly effective. For example, if a student is provided with background information that is not familiar, then the student must comprehend and learn the new material - it is, in itself, a learning activity: a student with little knowledge of the topic must first learn the information in the text. By contrast, this background reading will serve to activate a knowledgeable readers’ existing knowledge base. Thus, while the background reading may help a less-knowledgeable reader in the task, the background reading will also facilitate processing and learning from the more knowledgeable reader. Although enhancing learning for all learners is not inherently bad, this approach does not actually “level the playing field” as is usually the intent. Moreover, such an approach can disadvantage students with less knowledge if they do not understand or learn the background material (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996). In lieu of this approach, which leans upon assumptions of knowledge-as-consumption and knowledge-as-deficit, research in knowledge building and knowledge revision suggests that it is more effective to develop activities and interventions that help learners to leverage and manipulate the knowledge they already possess.
Leveraging Existing Knowledge
Rather than attempting to quickly introduce new information prior to a lesson, it is more effective to meet the students where they are. This can happen in two ways. The first is by providing individualized scaffolding. For example, students who demonstrate a deep misconception may need to engage in a different task than those who have little understanding of the topic at all. Different activities and interventions may be better suited to particular student profiles. A second complementary way to support learning is helping students to leverage the knowledge that they already possess. This is particularly important because information that exists in memory is not always immediately available, active, or used in a given learning task. Prompting students with more active learning strategies can encourage a deeper search of long-term memory. For example, students with more prior knowledge are more resistant to accepting inaccurate information (Rapp & Braasch, 2014; Richter, Schroeder & Wöhrmann, 2009). Explicitly prompting students to draw upon what they already know by correcting information as they read questionable new content does not fully inoculate them against the inaccurate information, but it can reduce the negative effects (Rapp et al., 2014).
Similarly, tutoring programs such as AutoTutor (Graesser et al., 2004) use questions and hints to help students to bring to bear their existing knowledge. AutoTutor incorporates automated, adaptive hints and prompts that encourage activation of knowledge as well as metacognitive processing, reasoning, and problem-solving strategies. The pedagogical agent moves the student toward the answer, allowing them to generate the solution themselves, rather than giving it to the student.
In addition to specific active learning activities, educators can also help students to learn and effectively use comprehension strategies that facilitate the activation and integration of existing knowledge during learning. For example, interventions like Self-Explanation Reading Training (SERT, McNamara, 2004, 2017). and reciprocal teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1986; Rosenshine & Meister, 1994) provide instruction and practice to support comprehension strategies such as paraphrasing, predicting, and inference. These strategies encourage learners to try to draw upon their existing prior knowledge to connect information from across different parts of a text and to think about how their current reading relates to things that they already know. 
Likewise, iSTART (Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking; McNamara, Levinstein & Boonthum, 2004) is an adaptive tutoring system that provides instruction on how to use self-explanation to build upon the knowledge that students have about the topic by using various comprehension strategies. Students learn to paraphrase and self-explain challenging content and then make links, either to prior knowledge or to prior text. iSTART has been shown to be effective across a wide spectrum of learner ages and abilities (Jackson & McNamara, 2013; McCarthy, Likens, et al., 2018; McCarthy et al., 2020a,b). Low-knowledge students in particular gain from this type of instruction because they learn that they can use the knowledge that they have to make sense of challenging text (Jackson, Boonthum, & McNamara, 2010). 
Instructors can also enhance learning by encouraging students to draw upon different types of knowledge. Intervention work shows that having students gesture during learning encourages them to draw upon embodied knowledge that can help them to leverage additional knowledge that they possess about the world (Glenberg et al., 2007; Hostetter & Alibali, 2019; Johnson-Glenberg et al., 2014). Encouraging students to gesture during reading (Glenberg, Goldberg & Zhu, 2011), while solving math equations (Broaders et al., 2007; Cook, Mitchell & Goldin-Meadow, 2008; Goldin-Meadow, Cook & Mitchell, 2009), or during science activities (Johnson-Glenberg & Megowan-Romanowicz, 2017) can support deeper understanding and longer retention. 
In formal education settings, many students can struggle because of a perceived distinction between “school knowledge” and everyday experience. For example, English Language Arts (ELA) students are often described as lacking the relevant knowledge to engage in discipline-appropriate interpretive reasoning. Levine (2019) argues that the issue is not that students lack this knowledge, but rather educators tend to frame interpretive reasoning as a school-bound, or formal learning activity devoid of connection to everyday experience. This framing prevents students from drawing upon the wealth of knowledge that they have. To demonstrate the potential of “everyday interpretation”, Levine asked students in an ELA course to read a literary short story. In one condition, students were given a common ELA classroom prompt asking about interpretation of themes. Students who were given this prompt tended to struggle with generating interpretations and story-appropriate themes. In another condition, students were asked to complete a sentence stem that encouraged the students to draw on their own everyday experience (“Reading this story suggests that the world can be a place where…”). These students not only generated more interpretations, but these interpretations were more aligned with the textual information. 
Educational research suggests that students are likely to have relevant knowledge that they may not recognize as relevant to the classroom context or to a particular learning task. Educators can help their students bring to bear their own knowledge through activities and prompts that encourage active generation of content that can draw upon multiple types of knowledge. This may involve extended instruction and practice so that students can readily deploy effective learning strategies, but they may also be short prompts or bite-sized changes to the wording of task instructions that can more explicitly guide students to see and use what they already know.
Updating and Revising Knowledge
It is impossible to learn new information without encountering false information or incorrectly interpreting information. Thus, learning also depends on processes of knowledge updating and revision. Once inaccurate information has been encoded and consolidated in long-term memory, it cannot simply be deleted or replaced (Dole & Sinatra, 1998; Kendeou & O’Brien, 2014). Indeed, researchers in areas of conceptual change argue that positioning learners’ misunderstandings or naive conceptions as misconceptions  that must be replaced, denies both the complexity of knowledge and its constructive nature (Smith, Disessa & Roschelle, 1994). Active generation during learning necessarily includes generating both right and wrong answers, and having incorrect or naive assumptions and understandings. Learning involves gradually developing a coherent understanding of concepts, with the general objective for knowledge to be accurate, or aligned with claims asserted by domain experts. Unfortunately, updating and revising knowledge can be challenging. 
In the era of “fake news” and misinformation, researchers have been working to understand how we can protect learners from encoding inaccurate information (Rapp et al., 2014; Rapp, 2016). While these steps for preventing inaccurate information from entering long-term memory are important, it is also critical to recognize that not all inaccurate information is derived through direct instruction. Students are not empty vessels; at the least, they bring to the table everyday experiences and observations and informal theories about the world (Carey, 1985). These naive conceptions and experiential knowledge often run counter to scientific explanations (Chinn & Brewer, 1993; Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992, 1994; Vosniadou & Skopeliti, 2017). For example, students experience gravity by seeing objects fall to the ground. These observations lead students to the conclusion that gravity’s force is exerted in an up and down motion along a flat surface. This makes it difficult for students to reckon with the scientific understanding that earth’s gravity is a centripetal force upon a spherical object. When experience runs counter or slightly askew to scientific explanations, students tend to develop fragmented mental models that allow for maintenance of counterfactuals or they construct coherent, but ultimately inaccurate understandings of the concepts (diSessa, Gillespie & Esterly, 2004). Inaccurate information and mental representations of concepts can render learning more difficult. Discrepant information makes it more difficult to construct a coherent mental model (Alvermann, Smith & Readence, 1985; Kendeou & van den Broek, 2007). Learners can also use their inaccurate information in mental model building, further misdirecting their understanding (Guzzetti et al., 1993; Kendeou & van den Broek, 2005). As this inaccurate understanding becomes more robust, the activation of inaccurate information becomes easier, making it even more challenging to revise the inaccurate nodes and links in the mental model.
	A common method of supporting conceptual change is through refutation text (Tippett, 2010; Zengilowski et al., 2021). In refutation texts, the common misconception is mentioned and then immediately refuted with the correct information. Intuitively, it may seem counterproductive to restate incorrect information. However, it is this co-activation of information that drives revision. Having both the correct and incorrect information active in memory at once increases the likelihood that the student will recognize and reconcile the discrepancy (Kendeou et al., 2014; van den Broek & Kendeou, 2008). Of course, knowledge revision is not likely to occur in a single instance, but rather refutations offer an opportunity to begin to cultivate a more accurate mental model through additional instruction and support.
Knowledge revision faces further challenges when new information clashes with inaccurate knowledge that is tied to strong attitudes, beliefs, and emotions ( Kendeou & Butterfuss, 2017; Murphy & Mason, 2006; Trevors, Thacker et al., 2020). For example, students often struggle to understand natural selection because the process is more complicated than common agent-based cause-and-effect relations (Chi et al., 2012; McLure, Won & Treagust, 2020). In addition to the issue of the process itself, ideas of natural selection and evolution are also at odds with many religious beliefs. Attitudes and beliefs tend to bias processing in that students willingly accept attitude-consistent information while rejecting and scrutinizing attitude-inconsistent content (Kunda, 1990; Lord, Ross & Lepper, 1979; Maier & Richter, 2013). Beyond topic-specific beliefs, learners epistemic knowledge and epistemic beliefs about the nature of knowing can also influence the extent to which learners engage with content that is inconsistent with their current understanding (Sinatra, Kienhues & Hofer, 2014; Trevors et al., 2017; Wiley et al., 2020). Interacting with conflicting information can also give rise to negative affective responses which can impede knowledge revision (Trevors, Kendeou & Butterfuss, 2017). 
These findings suggest that knowledge revision and conceptual change are more complex than simply correcting or replacing individual pieces of inaccurate information. Supporting students’ ability to engage in conceptual change and knowledge building requires not only co-activation and updating of declarative knowledge, but also attending to the learners’ attitudes and affects and supporting long-term changes in epistemic knowledge and beliefs so that students can develop discipline-appropriate knowledge and epistemologies (e.g., Goldman et al., 2016, Lombardi & Sinatra, 2017). These approaches enable students to build upon their existing knowledge in ways that help them to construct more accurate and coherent mental models.
Implications and Conclusions
Helping students to develop their knowledge is the cornerstone of education. However, acquiring knowledge is only beneficial insofar that learners can use that knowledge in new situations. Thus, knowledge is not merely an outcome, but also a key predictor in future learning. Existing research highlights that effective learning comes from capitalizing on what a student already knows and engaging the student in active, knowledge building. Learning activities that help students to draw upon the many types of knowledge that they already possess support more meaningful and long-term learning. In addition to understanding the many types of knowledge a learner has, it is also critical to consider multiple dimensions of that knowledge. Such a conceptualization of knowledge further pushes researchers and educators to move beyond diagnoses of the “haves” and “have nots” toward a richer understanding of the nature of what a student knows. 
	High quality evaluation of knowledge should include summative and formative assessments that tap the multiple types and dimensions of knowledge. It would be impossible to evaluate the whole of a learner’s knowledge in a single assessment. Instead, the aim would be to more carefully consider which aspects of knowledge are most clearly related with the current learning task or learning objective and to find or develop measures that align with that knowledge. Through more nuanced understanding of student knowledge, educators can develop instruction and practice that can help their students to more successfully build upon what they already know.
